7REFERENCES
7.1References
African Union (2012). 2050 Africa’s Integrated Maritime Strategy (2050 AIM Strategy). Available at: https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/11151/2050_aims_srategy.pdf. 
African Development Bank [AfDB] (2022). African Economic Outlook: Supporting Climate Resilience and a Just Energy Transition in Africa. (ADB: Abidjan, May 2022). 192 p. Available at: https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/african-economic-outlook-2022. 
AfDB (2014). Tanzania’s Seaports and Transport Corridors as Development Opportunity for East and Southern Africa. Regional Integration Brief, No. 3, July 2014. (AfDB: Tunis, July 2014). 8 p.
Agulhas and Somali Current Large Marine Ecosystem Project [ASCLME] (2012). ASCLME 2012. National Marine Ecosystem Diagnostic Analysis. Tanzania. Contribution to the Agulhas and Somali Current Large Marine Ecosystems Project (supported by UNDP with GEF grant financing). Viii +79 p.
Amir, O.A., Jiddawi, N.S. and Berggren, P. (2005). ‘The occurrence and distribution of dolphins in Zanzibar, Tanzania, with comments on the differences between two species of Tursiops.’ Western Indian Ocean Journal of Marine Sciences, 4(1). 85–93.
Anderson, J. (2021). Livelihoods from the Ocean: How Science and Technology Can Contribute to Their Sustainability in Tanzania. SOLSTICE Science into Policy Review Paper, October 2021.
Brownfield, M.E., C.J. Schenk, R.R. Charpentier, T.R. Klett, T.A. Cook, R.M. Pollastro, and M.E. Tennyson (2012). Assessment of Undiscovered Oil and Gas Resources of Four East Africa Geologic Provinces. U.S. Geological Survey Fact Sheet, 2012–3039. 4 p.
CBD Secretariat and the Scientific and Technical Advisory Panel (2012). Marine Spatial Planning in the Context of the Convention on Biological Diversity. CBD Technical Series No. 68. (CBD Secretariat: Montreal, 2012). 44 p. 
Celliers, L. (2017). A Case for Marine Spatial Planning in the Blue Economy of the Western Indian Ocean. (Nairobi Convention Secretariat/Western Indian Ocean Marine Science Association: 2017). 53pp.
Deep Sea Fishing Authority [DSFA]/Institute of Marine Sciences [IMS] (2021). Policy Brief: Towards a Sustainable Management of Tuna Fishery in Tanzania. (DSFA: Zanzibar, 2021). 5 p. 
Ehler, C. and F. Douvere (2009). Marine Spatial Planning: S Step-by-Step Approach Toward Ecosystem-based Management. IOC Manual and Guides No. 53, ICAM Dossier No. 6. (UNESCO: Paris, 2009). 99 p.
FAO (2007). National Fishery Sector Overview: The United Republic Of Tanzania. Available at: https://www.fao.org/fishery/en/facp/215/en.
Gates, A.R., Durden, J.M., Richmond, M.D., Muhando, C.A., Khamis, Z.A., and Jones, D.O.B. (2021).  ‘Ecological considerations for marine spatial management in deep-water Tanzania.’ Ocean and Coastal Management 210. 16 p.
GEF LME:LEARN (2018). Large Marine Ecosystems Marine Spatial Planning (MSP) Toolkit. 117 p. Available at: https://iwlearn.net/resolveuid/5c714161-b726-47a1-b4af-89e521d5f2db
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania (2021). Nationally Determined Contribution.  (Dodoma: Office of the Vice President, July 2021).
Government of Zanzibar (2009). National ICZM Strategies and Action Plan for Zanzibar. 
Gullström, M., Dahl, D., Lindén, O., Vorhies, F., Forsberg, S., Ismail, R.O. and Björk, M. (2021). Coastal Blue Carbon Stocks in Tanzania and Mozambique: Support for Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Actions. (IUCN: Gland, Switzerland, 2021). x+80 p.
Henstridge, M. (2022). ‘Gas in Tanzania: Adapting to new realities.’ In Mining for Change: Natural Resources and Industry in Africa, Page, J. and Tarp F. (eds). (Oxford Academic Press: Oxford, February 2022).  232-255.
Horrill, C. (2020). Fisheries Co-Management in Zanzibar. Informal Briefing Note Prepared under the SWIOFish Project. 
Huang, C-Y., Namangaya, A., Lugakingira, M.W. and Cantada, I.D. (2018). Translating Plans to Development: Impact and Effectiveness of Urban Planning in Tanzania Secondary Cities. (World Bank: Washington, DC, October 2018). 65 p. 
International Fund for Agricultural Development [IFAD] (2020). Agriculture and Fisheries Development Programme (AFDP) Project Design Report. IFAD Report No. 5487-TZ. 
Jeppesen, G. and Richmond, M. (2016). Investment Prioritization for Climate-Resilient Livelihoods and Ecosystems in the Coastal Zones of Tanzania Overview January 2016.  Priorities for Tanzania’s coastal zone over the next ten years (2016 – 2025). (World Bank: Washington DC, January 2016). 35 p. Available at: https://www.ndf.int/media/project-files/overview_publication_january_2016-1.pdf. 
Lubida, A. (2019). Investigating Spatial Data Infrastructure Planning in Tanzania using System Modelling and Social Concepts. Available at: https://lup.lub.lu.se/search/ws/files/71747275/e_nailing_ex_Alex.pdf. 
Mangora, M.M, Blandina R.L., Mwanahija S.S. and Semesi, S. (2016). ‘Mangroves of Tanzania.’ In: Bosire J. O., Mangora M. M., , Bandeira S., Rajkaran A., Ratsimbazafy R., Appadoo C. and Kairo J. G. (eds.). Mangroves of the Western Indian Ocean: Status and Management. (WIOMSA: Zanzibar, 2016). 51-73.
Mangrove Alliance (2019). Tanzania Policy Brief: How Can the Legal and Policy Framework be Strengthened to Ensure Sustainable Use and Conservation of Mangroves? December 2019. Available at: https://www.mangrovealliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/MangroveGovernance_PolicyBrief_TANZANIA.pdf. 
Marine Parks and Reserves Unit [MPRU] (2011). Mafia Island Marine Park General Management Plan. (MPRU: Dar es Salaam, September 2011).
McAteer, B., Fullbrook, L., n-Hong Liu, W., Reed, J., Rivers, N., Vaidianu, N., Westholm, A., Toonen, H., van Tatenhove, J., Clarke, J., Ansong, J., Trouillet, B., Santos, K.F., Eger, S., ten Brink, T., Waden, E. and Flannery, W. (2022). ‘Marine Spatial planning in regional ocean areas: Trends and lessons learned.’ Ocean Yearbook, 36: 346–380.
McGowan, L., Jay, S. and Kidd, S. (2019). ‘Scenario-building for marine spatial planning. In J. Zaucha, K. Gee (eds.), Maritime Spatial Planning – Past, Present, Future. (Springer Nature: Cham, Switzerland, 2019).  327-351.
Metuge, D., Lombard, A.T. and Snow, B. (2021). Policy Brief: Western Indian Ocean Marine Spatial Planning Strategy. (Institute for Coastal and Marine Research, Nelson Mandela University: Port Elizabeth, September 2021). 6 p. Available at: https://nairobiconvention.org/clearinghouse/sites/default/files/WIO%20MSP%20Policy%20Brief_6%20Oct2021.pdf. 
Ministry of Blue Economy and Fisheries [MoBEF] (2022). Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy (2020). (MoBEF: Zanzibar, May 2022). 36 p.
Ministry of Finance and Planning (2021). National Five Year development Plan 2021/22 – 2025/26: Realising Competitiveness and Industrialisation for Human Development. (Ministry of Finance and Planning: Dodoma, Tanzania, June 2021). 321 p. 
Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries (2012). Zanzibar Coastal and Marine Tourism Management Plan. Report Prepared under the Marine and Coastal Environment Management Project (MACEMP).
Office of the Vice President [VPO] (2022). National Environmental Master Plan for Strategic Interventions (2022-2032). (VPO: Dodoma, June 2022). 155 p.
Purvis, D. and Jiddawi, N.  (2021). Current State of Seagrasses in Zanzibar: Impacts of Coastal Economic Activities and Marine Protected Areas on Seagrass Cover. Capstone Collection. 3239. Available at: https://digitalcollections.sit.edu/capstones/3239.
Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar [RGoZ] (2020). Zanzibar in Figures 2020. (Office of the Chief Government Statistician: Zanzibar, Jun 2020. Available at: http://www.ocgs.go.tz/php/ReportOCGS/Zanzibar%20In%20Figures%202020.pdf. 
Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar [RGoZ] (2022). Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy, May, 2022.
Ruitenbeek, J., Hewawasam, I. and Ngoile, M. (2005). Blueprint 2050: Sustaining the Marine Environment in Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar. (World Bank: Washington DC, 2005). 125 p.
Shaghude, Y.W., Muhando, C.A., Nyandwi, N.M., Kyewalyanga, M.S., Semba, M., Kizenga, H. J., Kuguru, B.L. and Ussi, A. (2021). Oceanographic Factors Influencing Tuna and Tuna-Like Species in the Tanzanian Exclusive Economic Zone, Territorial Seas and Internal Waters. (DSFA: Zanzibar, June 20210). 46 p.
Shao, F.M, Miay, E.E. and Mushi, V.E. (2003). Review of Marine Fisheries for Tanzania. Report of the Understanding Fisheries Livelihoods and Constraints to their Development, Kenya and Tanzania Project. Report No FMSP Project R8196. (Department for International Development: London, UK, April 2003). 81 p.  
Tanzania Coastal Management Partnership [TCMP] (2001a). Tanzania State of the Coast 2001: People and the Environment. (TCMP: Dar Es Salaam, October 2001). 53 p. Available at: https://www.crc.uri.edu/download/TZ_SOC_2001.pdf. 
Tanzanian Forest Services Agency [TFSA], 2022. Tanzania’s Mangroves. Available at: https://www.tfs.go.tz/index.php/en/forests/tanzanias-mangroves. 
Tanzania Ports Authority [TPA] (2022). Updated National Ports Masterplan. Contract No. AE/016/2018-19/CTB/C/13. 
 UNEP-Nairobi Convention/WIOMSA (2021a). ‘Marine & Coastal Areas Under Protection. United Republic of Tanzania: Tanzania Mainland’. In UNEP-Nairobi Convention and WIOMSA. 2021. Western Indian Ocean Marine Protected Areas Outlook: Towards Achievement of the Global Biodiversity Framework Targets. (UNEP and WIOMSA: Nairobi, Kenya, 2021). 298 p.
 UNEP-Nairobi Convention/WIOMSA (2021b). Marine & Coastal Areas under Protection: United Republic of Tanzania: Zanzibar’,  203–214. In UNEP-Nairobi Convention and WIOMSA. 2021. Western Indian Ocean Marine Protected Areas Outlook: Towards achievement of the Global Biodiversity Framework Targets. (UNEP and WIOMSA: Nairobi, Kenya, 2021). 298 p.
UNEP-Nairobi Convention/WIOMSA (2015). The Regional State of the Coast Report: Western Indian Ocean. (UNEP/WIOMSA: Nairobi, 2015). 546 p.
UNESCO-IOC (2021). MSP Global Policy Brief: Marine Spatial Planning and the Sustainable Blue Economy. IOC Policy Brief no 2. (UNESCO: Paris, 2021). 15 p.
UNESCO-IOC/EU. 2021. MSP Global: International Guide on Marine/Maritime Spatial Planning. IOC Manuals and Guides no 89. (UNESCO: Paris, 2021). 148 p.
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa [UNECA] (2016). Africa's Blue Economy: A Policy Handbook. (UNECA: Addis Ababa, 2016). 92 p. Available at: https://hdl.handle.net/10855/23014. 
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA). Sub-Regional Office for Eastern Africa (2022). Zanzibar Tourism Satellite Account: Estimating the contribution of tourism to the economy of Zanzibar. (UNECA: Kigali, Rwanda). 122 p. Available at: https://hdl.handle.net/10855/47591.
UN Women (2020). Women’s Economic Empowerment in Fisheries in the Blue Economy of the Indian Ocean Rim. (UN Women: New York, 2020). 126 p. 
US Department of State [USDOS] (2014). Limits in the Seas No. 132: Seychelles Archipelagic and Other Maritime Claims And Boundaries. (Office of Ocean Affairs, Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs: Washington DC, 14 February 2014). 
Wagner G.M. (2004). ‘Coral reefs and their management in Tanzania’. Western Indian Ocean Journal of Marine Sciences, 3(2). 227–243.
World Bank (2022a). Blue Economy Data and Tools. (World Bank Group: Washington DC, 2022). 63 p. 
World Bank (2022b). Marine Spatial Planning for a Resilience and Inclusive Blue Economy. (World Bank Group: Washington DC, 2022). 109 p.
World Bank (2020). Doing Business 2020: Comparing Business  Regulation in  190 Economies. (World Bank: Washington DC, 2020). 135 p. Available at: https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/688761571934946384/pdf/Doing-Business-2020-Comparing-Business-Regulation-in-190-Economies.pdf. 
World Bank (2019). Zanzibar: A Pathway to Tourism for All. Integrated Strategic Action Plan: July 2019. https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/993701565250577192/pdf/Zanzibar-A-Pathway-to-Tourism-for-All-Integrated-Strategic-Action-Plan.pdf 
World Bank (2018a). Country Partnership Framework Document for the United Republic of Tanzania. Report No. 121790-TZ. RT (World Bank: Washington DC, February, 2018). 95 p.
World Bank (2018b). Port Development and Competition in East and Southern Africa: Prospects and Challenges. (World Bank, Washington, DC.).
Zanzibar Planning Commission (2020). Zanzibar Development Vision 2050.
7.2
Legal and Policy Instruments Reviewed
7.2.1URT/Mainland Tanzania
CATEGORY	TITLE
Policy Instruments
	The Constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania, 1977
	DRAFT Deep Sea Fisheries Policy (2022)
	National Five Year Development Plan 2021/22 – 2025/26
	The Tanzania Development Vision (2025)
	National Environmental Policy (2021)
	Wildlife Policy of Tanzania (1998, revised in 2007)
	National Environmental Master Plan for Strategic Intervention (2022-2032)
	National Policies for National Parks in Tanzania (1994)
	National Forest Policy (1998)
	National Integrated Coastal Environment Management Strategy (NICEMS)
	National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (2015)
	National Fisheries Policy (2015)
	National Transport Policy (2003)
	National Energy Policy (2015)
	National Tourism Policy of Tanzania (1999)
	
Primary Legal Instruments	Territorial Sea and Exclusive Economic Zone Act (No. 3 of 1989)
	Deep Sea Fishing Authority Act (No. 1 of 1998)
	Deep Sea Fisheries Management and Development Act (No. 5 of 2020)
	Tanzania Land Survey Act (No. 18 of 1997)
	Environmental Management Act (No. 20 of 2004)
	Marine Parks and Reserves Act (No. 29 of 1994)
	National Parks Act (No. 11 of 2003)
	Wildlife Conservation Act (No. 5 of 2009)
	Forest Act (No. 7 of 2002)
	Local Government (District Authorities) Act (No. 7 of 1982)
	Local Government (Urban Authorities) Act (No. 8 of 1982)
	Fisheries Act (No. 22 of 2003)
	Tanzania Shipping Agencies Act (No. 14 of 2017)
	Merchant Shipping Act (No. 21 of 2003)
	Tanzania Ports Authority Act (No. 17 of 2004)
	Petroleum Act (No. 21 of 2015)
	Tourism  Act  (No. 29 of  2008)  
	
Secondary Legal Instruments	Marine Parks and Reserves (Declaration) Regulations, 1999
	Fisheries (Amendment) Regulations, 2009
	Fisheries (Amendment) Regulations, 2020

7.2.2
Zanzibar
CATEGORY	TITLE
Policy Instruments	The Constitution of Zanzibar (1984)
	DRAFT Deep Sea Fisheries Policy (2022)
	Zanzibar Development Plan (ZADEP) 2021-2026
	Zanzibar Development Vision 2050
	Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy (2022)
	Zanzibar Environmental Policy (2013)
	The Forest Policy for Zanzibar (1996)
	National Land Policy of Zanzibar (2018)
	Zanzibar National Transport Policy (2008)
	Zanzibar Development Vision (2050)
	Zanzibar Energy Policy (2009)
	Zanzibar Oil and Gas (Upstream) Policy (2016)
	Zanzibar Tourism Policy (2018)
	
Primary Legal Instruments	Territorial Sea and Exclusive Economic Zone Act (No. 3 of 1989)
	Deep Sea Fishing Authority Act (No. 1 of 1998)
	Deep Sea Fisheries Management and Development Act (No. 5 of 2020)
	Zanzibar Environmental Management Act (No. 3 of 2015)
	Fisheries Act (No. 7 of 2010)
	DRAFT Zanzibar Fisheries Bill (2022)
	DRAFT Marine Resources Conservation and Management (2022)
	DRAFT Zanzibar Fisheries And Marine Resources Research Institute (2022)
	Zanzibar Maritime Authority Act (No. 3 of 2009)
	Regional Administration Act (2014)
	Local Government Act (2014)
	Maritime Transport Act (No. 5 of 2006)
	Zanzibar Ports Corporation Act (No.1 of 1997)
	Oil and Gas (Upstream) Act (No. 6 of 2016)
	Zanzibar Tourism Act (No. 9 of 2009)
	
Secondary Legal Instruments	Marine Conservation Unit Regulations (2013)

Annex A: SCOPING STUDY TERMS OF REFERENCE (TOR)
















Annex B: LIST OF ORGANISATIONS CONSULTED DURING THE ANALYSIS
NO.	INSTITUTION
1	Deep Sea Fishing Authority (DSFA)
2	European Union (EU)
3	GIZ
4	Institute of Marine Sciences, University of Dar es Salaam (IMS)
5	International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN)
6	Kikosi Maalum cha Kuzuia Magendo (KMKM)
7	Marine Parks and Reserves Unit (MPRU)
8	Milele Foundation 
9	Ministry of Blue Economy and Fisheries (MoBEF)
10	Ministry of Defense and National Service (MoDNS)
11	Ministry of Energy (MoE)
12	Ministry of Finance and Planning (MFP)
13	Ministry of Foreign Affairs and East African Cooperation (MFAEAC)
14	Ministry of Infrastructure, Communications and Transportation (MICT)
15	Ministry of Lands, Housing and Human Settlement Development (MLHHSD)
16	Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries (MLF)
17	Ministry of Minerals
18	Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism (MNRT)
19	Mwambao Coastal Communities 
20	National Environmental Management Council (NEMC)
21	Nelson Mandela African Institution of Science and Technology (NM-AIST)
22	NOVIA UAS
23	Petroleum Utility Regulatory Authority (PURA)
24	President’s Office Regional Administration and Local Government (PO-RALG) - Mainland
25	President's Office Regional Administration, Local Government and Special Department - Zanzibar
26	Prime Minister's Office (PMO)
27	Sea Sense 
28	State University of Zanzibar (SUZA)
29	Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH)
30	Tanzania Fisheries Research Institute (TAFIRI)
31	Tanzania Forest Services Agency (TFS)
32	Tanzania Petroleum Development Corporation (TPDC)
33	Tanzania Ports Authority (TPA)
34	Tanzania Shipping Agencies Corporation (TASAC)
35	Tanzania Telecommunications Company Limited (TTCL)
36	The Blue Ventures 
37	The Germany Embassy
38	The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
39	The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
40	UN Women 
41	Vice President's Office (VPO)
42	Western Indian Ocean Marine Science Association (WIOMSA)
43	Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
44	WWF, Tanzania
45	Zanzibar Association of Tourism Operators (ZATO)
46	Zanzibar Commission for Tourism (ZCT)
47	Zanzibar Disaster Management Commission (ZDMC)
48	Zanzibar Environmental Management Authority (ZEMA)
49	Zanzibar Fisheries Company Limited (ZAFICO)
50	Zanzibar Lands Commission (ZLC)
51	Zanzibar Marine and Fisheries Research Institute (ZAFIRI)
52	Zanzibar Maritime Authority (ZMA)
53	Zanzibar Petroleum Regulatory Authority (ZPRA)
54	Zanzibar Planning Commission (ZPC)
55	Zanzibar Ports Corporation (ZPC)



Annex C: MSP CASE STUDIES
Case Study 1: South Africa MSP Process
To support development of a national marine spatial planning process, the Government of South Africa has established a comprehensive spatial management system. Under this system, MSP is to be implemented through a system of binding ‘Marine Area Plans’, with detailed guidelines and spatial regulations to guide future development. Overall, the approach taken by South Africa is seen to be comprehensive, logical and systematic. In terms of setting up the basic foundations for MSP, this example therefore represents a good model to draw from. The system consists of a number of specific but inter-related elements, which are outlined below:
Marine Spatial Planning Framework
The South African Marine Spatial Planning Framework provides high-level direction for undertaking MSP in the context of the South African legislation and policies, as well as existing planning regimes. It describes the process for the preparation and t implementation of Marine Area Plans, to ensure consistency in MSP across South Africa’s ocean space. 
The framework defines MSP as:
the governance process of collaboratively assessing and managing the spatial and temporal distribution of human activities to achieve economic, social and ecological objectives. 
The framework defines a number of characteristics that will define MSP in South Africa, namely: (i) Area-based; (ii) Integrated; (iii) Multi-objective; (iv) Participatory and coordinated; (iv) Ecosystem-based; (v) Strategic and future-oriented; and (vi) Continuing and adaptive. The framework also sets out the following Vision for MSP:
A productive, healthy and safe ocean that is accessible, understood, equitably governed and sustainably developed and managed for the benefit of all.
This is to be realised through the achievement of the following four goals, underpinned by 9 MSP principles:

Overarching MSP objectives are intended to be achieved over a 20-year period.
Marine Spatial Planning Act
The Marine Spatial Planning Act No. 16 of 2018 provides the legal basis for MSP in South Africa. The Act describes the principles and criteria that direct the development of Marine Area Plans. While they set out how marine space should ideally develop, they also apply to the marine planning process itself and the need to balance various interests. Among other aspects, the Act provides for:
?the institutional arrangements for the MSP to govern the use of the ocean by and across multiple sectors and the draft MSP Act were published to provide a structure for marine planning in South Africa’s waters. 
?the development of marine area plans
Institutional Arrangements
The Department of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries (DEFF) is the lead authority for MSP. DEFF collaborates with all authorities that have relevant statutory responsibilities/mandates. To facilitate this, the Government has established the MSP National Working Group, a technical group responsible for the development of the marine area plans. The Group consists of officials from institutions with marine mandates in the following sectors: maritime transport;  tourism; conservation and environmental management; mineral and petroleum resources; energy; fisheries and aquaculture; scientific research; telecommunications; marine heritage; and, defence.
Marine Area Plans
Marine Area Plans are integrated sustainable development plans that recognise that ocean space and resources should be developed sustainably to ensure they can support as many multi sector demands as possible. There is a presumption that all sectors have an equal right to access ocean resources, but that conflicting interests must be balanced in the process of developing a Marine Area Plan. Robust stakeholder engagement and a sound evidence base (in terms of spatial data and information) are therefore essential elements of the planning process.
	To support planning, South Africa’s marine area has been divided into four biogeographic planning units: the East Coast, the South-East Coast, the West Coast and the Prince Edward Islands.

The key elements that Marine Area Plans will consist of, but are not necessarily limited to, are:
a) The Goals and objectives for each Marine Area Plan, and its general and sector development guidelines;
b) The zoning scheme with a description of the zones and their associated regulations that apply;
c) A map that indicates the location of the zones and provides additional information on the location where existing spatial regulations apply (e.g. designated marine protected areas or port limits);
d) An implementation section detailing how the Marine Area Plan will be implemented; and
e) A monitoring and evaluation section detailing how the Marine Area Plan will be monitored and evaluated.
For each Marine Area Plan, a spatial management system is proposed that consists of: 
a) general development guidelines - to provide a framework for planners and sectoral decision-makers to enable sustainable ocean development throughout the Marine Planning Area.
b) sector development guidelines - for each specific maritime sectors in the respective Marine Planning Areas. Their aim is to promote the sustainable development of the respective sectors in line with (national and sub-national) sector objectives (e.g. as already specified in sector policies, strategies or plans, or as specified in dedicated consultation processes) and in line with the overall objectives for the particular Marine Planning Area.
c) a zoning scheme with spatial regulations - “Zone” in the context of the zoning scheme of the Marine Area Plans means a defined category of sea use that is shown on the map for the Marine Area Plan. Zones go beyond the general and sector development guidelines in that they pre-define desired combinations of use for specific marine areas. They are arranged in the Marine Plan Area in such a way as to enable the best possible pattern of use. 
Zones allow priorities to be set for certain uses and activities based on criteria such as suitability and compatibility, and can be used to restrict activities in certain marine areas. Zones and their regulations are based on the following types of use:
?Primary use is an activity that is given priority in a particular zone. Other activities are only allowed in the zone if they do not impede the primary use.
?Consent use is an activity that is compatible with the primary use of the zone and ]which can be approved in a primary use zone under specified conditions.
?Prohibited use is an activity that is not allowed in the zone as it would impede the primary use
Existing sector regulations for specific human activities are not replaced by the zoning scheme, but rather complemented by this area-based management system in that they may become the primary means of implementing spatial planning regulations (For example, in the case of Conservation Zones, a Strict Protection Zone could be delineated on the basis of a pre-existing marine protected areas).
The zoning scheme itself, together with the consent and prohibited uses for each zone and including the conditions under which consent uses can be approved in a primary use zone, will need to be developed in close collaboration with the respective stakeholders.
Knowledge and Information System
The Knowledge and Information System, is a requirement under the Marine Spatial Planning Act and the National Framework for Marine Spatial Planning. It will provide both an evidence base to design marine area plans and to collate the spatial layers that are needed to design the marine plan. To this end, South Africa has focused heavily on collecting and collecting marine spatial data which is being used to inform planning decisions throughout South Africa.
	A comprehensive National MSP Data and Information Report has been prepared (containing a comprehensive data audit of existing marine spatial data as well as the development of an open source  The National Oceans and Coastal Information Management System (OCIMS) provides decision support for the effective governance of South Africa’s oceans and coasts.[ https://www.ocims.gov.za/marine-spatial-planning-support/]

Key challenges
South Africa’s MSP Framework acknowledges that consistent and early participation of stakeholders is important. However, a lack of government capacity in this regard has led to the exclusion of academics with valuable expertise in MSP processes, as well as marginalizing small-scale fisheries communities and other stakeholders. Upskilling of officials to facilitate inclusive participatory processes, the inclusion of researchers as well as capacity-building of affected stakeholders is, therefore, a crucial requirement going forward. Additionally, as MSP has only recently come into force in South Africa, the mitigation of inter-sectoral conflicts through trade-offs is only in the initial stages. Fragmented and unstable governance systems, characterized by a lack of integration, coordination, and transparency, are some of the key challenges impacting the development of MSP in the region. 
Challenges to collecting necessary data have included sourcing data, data usage agreements and the establishment of a data management-hosting platform. Current data gaps include both biophysical and socio-economic data. 

Summary of the South Africa MSP Framework

Case Study 2: Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority Planning Arrangements (Australia)
Overview
One of the earliest and best-known examples of marine spatial planning is Australia’s Great Barrier Reef Marine Park (GBRMP), encompassing and extending along 2,300km of the northeastern coast of Australia. This is not a national-scale MSP, but rather a broad scale planning process for a legally designated marine park, administered by a statutory body (the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority), with the goal to “provide for the long-term protection, ecologically sustainable use, understanding and enjoyment of the Great Barrier Reef through the care and development” of the park.
The GBRMP differs from other examples of MSP in that it is primarily regulatory in nature. Effective management of the park relies upon the cooperation of a number of management agencies (both federal and State), using a number of management tools, including many that are regarded as components of MSP  (e.g. zoning plans, plans of management, other spatial plans) along with various management approaches (e.g. education, planning, partnerships, enforcement) to control and/or mitigate impacts of various activities (e.g. tourism, fishing, shipping) and to address various pressures/threats such as climate change, water quality, and population growth.
Management Approach
Guided by the principle of balancing conservation and sustainable use, the GBRMP Authority has developed a multiple-use management regime. Spatial planning and zoning are the cornerstones of the management strategy to maintain biological diversity and to manage impacts of an expanding tourist industry, effects of fishing, and impacts of pollution and shipping. 
In addition to tourism and recreation, other major industries include the following. 
 Military Training: Training activities are undertaken in a few designated areas of the reef, covering approximately 4% of the GBRMP. 
 Fishing: Commercial, recreational, Indigenous and charter fishing target a range of species including fish, sharks, crabs and prawns. 
 Commercial shipping: There are 10 major trading ports and two minor ones along the Great Barrier Reef coast; the waters surrounding most of these ports fall within the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area, but not within the GBRMP. 
 Scientific research: Under the GBRMP Zoning Plan, scientific research is permitted in relatively undisturbed areas called Scientific Research Zones. 
 Traditional uses: Traditional use of marine resources by Traditional Owners is allowed under all zones in the GBRMP Zoning Plan.
Zoning Plan
GBRMP spatial management is based on eight zones from the least restrictive “general use zone,” in which shipping and most commercial fishing are allowed, to the most restrictive “preservation zone,” in which virtually no use is permitted. The zones, designed to protect the Marine Park’s range of biodiversity, operate as a connected network and deliver a range of benefits, including benefits to society. The park allows commercial and recreational activities, including some extractive industries, though not mining or drilling for oil.
The multiple-use zoning network provides high levels of protection in no-take zones and very small no-go zones for one-third (117,000 km2) of the Marine Park. The design of these zones maximizes the protection of biodiversity while minimizing the impacts on all other users, including fishermen. The zoning network governs all human activities, providing high levels of protection for specific areas, while still allowing other uses. 

	

Zoning is only one of many spatial management tools used in the GBR. Other spatial layers that overlay the underlying zoning include statutory Plans of Management in key areas, site plans, special management areas and other spatial provisions (e.g. Defence Training Areas, shipping areas, agreements with Traditional Owners). Non-spatial management arrangement include bag limits, size limits and various permit conditions, and temporal management arrangements include seasonal closures at key fish spawning times or temporary closures for short term activities like military training.
Key lessons learnt about zoning and MSP in the GBR
GBR uses zoning by objective rather than zoning by activity 
If zoning is used to address all existing activities, it is preferable that zoning be by ‘objective’ rather than by each ‘individual activity’. The difference between zoning by objective rather than zoning by activity is best explained by an example; a ‘no-trawling’ zone may indicate clearly an activity is prohibited (i.e. all trawling is banned in that zone), but it may not be clear as to why it is banned or what other activities may be allowed or not allowed.  
It is also important to note that in each of the zones that have multiple parts in their objective (for example, providing for both conservation and reasonable use), there is a clear hierarchy within the objective, with the second part always being subject to the first (i.e. reasonable use can only occur subject to ensuring conservation).
It can take many years to implement an effective zoning framework 
The first zoning plans were progressively developed for parts of the Marine Park in the early 1980s, but it was not until 13 years after the outer boundary of the Marine Park was first declared that the entire GBR was zoned (ie.1988). From 1988 until mid-2004, less than 5% of the entire GBR was zoned in highly protected ‘no-take’ zones. 
Zoning does not imply that an activity may be undertaken without any controls
Activities such as aquaculture or harvest fishing that may or may not have an impact MAY be permitted to occur in that zone but only after undergoing a detailed permit assessment process. The assessment determines whether the specific proposal (such as the actual aquaculture method or proposed location of the harvest fishing) is compatible with the zone objective and meets all the necessary permit criteria. 
There is a need to consider the adjacent lands for fully effective marine conservation 
Management of the marine realm alone, without working in close partnership with the adjoining coastal waters and catchments, is unlikely to result in effective marine conservation.  
The challenge of integrating the land-sea connections recognises that land-sea planning should involve explicit conservation objectives for processes that connect the land and the sea as well as explicit ways of accounting for threats that originate in one realm and affect the other.
Many of the current initiatives undertaken within GBRMPA and other agencies, such as the mapping of coastal ecosystems, the identification of key areas within catchment basins, and working with farmers to minimise their impacts on water quality,  are specifically aimed at addressing this land-sea interface and the adjoining coastal waters and catchments. 
Zoning may deliver some results very quickly while others may take decades to become apparent
The current management/planning framework has delivered conservation benefits for the entire GBR ecosystem but equally flow-on social and economic benefits for adjacent communities and industries— including the commercial fishing, recreational fishing and tourism industries that rely on the GBR for their livelihoods.
Adaptive management is a key aspect of managing any marine area; it is also important to recognise that some management actions need to be in place for a reasonable period of time to be effective or to enable a reasonable assessment of their effectiveness. Adopting an adaptive management approach also enables managers to be flexible and to expect, and deal with, the unexpected (e.g. climate change was not even considered an important marine issue a decade ago).
Adaptive-management approach is an essential part of effective ecosystem-based management
Many of the reasons why the GBR is a good working example for MSP relate to how management has evolved and adapted, and despite the jurisdictional complexities, continues to be well integrated (e.g. complementary legislation for all State and Federal waters) with good cooperation with most sectors.
Zoning is undoubtedly an important management tool for effective management of the GBRMP. However to remain effective, it must be periodically reviewed, especially considering the enormous changes over the 39 years since the GBR Marine Park came into effect; these include:
?rapidly changing patterns of use
?technological change
?social-economic changes
?political changes
?and most importantly, recognising marine ecosystems are dynamic natural systems subject to a myriad of environmental changes.
Any successful management regime must be adaptable and be able to incorporate such changes and as new information becoming available or as circumstances change.  Irrespective of whether a change in marine management results from new data, ‘in-the-field’ experience, or as a result of external circumstances, all management practices must be periodically reviewed and updated where appropriate. 




Annex D: RELEVANT INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL AGREEMENTS TO WHICH THE URT IS PARTY 
•United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982
•Convention on Biological Diversity, 1992
•Convention of International Trade in Endangered Species, 1972 (CITES)
•The Convention on Wetlands of International Importance, especially as Waterfowl Habitat, 1971 (Ramsar Convention)
•Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea Relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stock
•International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling 1948 ad 1959 
•International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea
•International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the Protocol of 1978 (MARPOL 73/78) including Annexes I-VI 
•The International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-operation, 1990 (OPRC Convention
•Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972 (London Convention
•Nairobi Convention for the Protection, Management and Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the Eastern African Region, 1985 (Nairobi Convention)
•Protocol for the Protection of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the Western Indian Ocean from Land-Based Sources and Activities, 2010.
•Protocol to the International Convention relating to Intervention on the High Seas in Cases of Oil Pollution Casualties, 1973; (INTERVENTION Protocol 73) 
•Protocol of 1992 to the International Convention for the Establishment of an International Fund for the Compensation of Oil Pollution, 1971 (FUND Protocol 1992)
•Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, 1972



Annex E: POSSIBLE SECTOR-SPECIFIC SPATIAL MANAGEMENT TOOLS
SECTOR	SPATIAL MANAGEMENT TOOL
MARINE TRANSPORTATION	–Mandatory Vessel Traffic Routes
–Ship Routes/Fairways
–Vessel Traffic Separation Schemes
–Areas To Be Avoided (by vessels)
–Precautionary or Prohibited Areas
–Particularly Sensitive Sea Areas (PSSAs)
–Lightering Areas
–Moving Safety (Buffer) & Security Zones Around LNG Tankers
–Pilot Boarding Areas
–Safety Zones Around Oil Spill Response Operations
PORTS 
	–Safety Zones Around Vessels and Terminals
–Anchoring & No-Anchoring Grounds or Areas
–Security Zones in Ports and Waterways
–Offshore Port Zones for Oil or LNG Transfers
FISHING	–Fishery Closures Areas, including Seasonal Closures
–No Trawl Areas
–Critical Habitat Designations
–Artificial Reef Areas
OFFSHORE AQUACULTURE	–Offshore Areas Designated for Aquaculture
OIL & GAS	–Oil & Gas Lease or Concession Areas
–Areas Withdrawn from Leasing
–Safety Zones Around Offshore Installations
RENEWABLE ENERGY	–Wind Farms, Wave Parks, & Tidal Energy Lease or Concession Areas
–Safety Zones Around Wind Farms, Wave Parks, Tidal Facilities
PIPELINES & CABLES	–Pipeline Rights-of-Way or Areas
–Communications Cable Rights-of-Way
–Energy Transmission Cable Rights-of-Way
–Cable Lines (not always in Rights-of-Way)
SEWAGE	–Sewer Lines and Diffusers
DREDGING	–Dredging Sites or Areas
–Dredged Material Disposal Areas or Sites (Active & Inactive)
MILITARY	–Military Operations or Exercise/Training Areas (“Hot Zones”)
–Danger, Restricted, or Security Areas
–Missile Testing Ranges
–Submarine Operating Areas
–Water Space Management for Submarine Operations
–Sonar Operating Zones
–Security and Safety Around Naval Ships
–Unexploded Ordinance Areas
RECREATION	–Wildlife Viewing Areas
–Personal Watercraft Areas
–Passenger Submarine Operating Areas
MARINE PROTECTED AREAS	–Marine Nature Reserves or Ecological Reserves (no take, no access, no impact zones) (IUCN Category 1A)
–Marine Wilderness Areas (Category 1B)
–Marine Parks (Category II)
–Marine Monuments (Category III)
–Habitat/Species Management Areas (Category IV)
–Protected Seascapes (Category V)
–Managed Resource Protected Areas (Category VI)
NATURE CONSERVATION	–Fish Spawning Areas
–Fish Nursery Areas
–Marine Mammal Breeding Areas
–Marine Mammal Feeding Areas
–Marine Mammal Migration Routes
–Marine Mammal Stopover Areas
–Seabird Feeding Areas
–Sea Grass Beds
–Coral Reefs
–Wetlands
HISTORY & CULTURE	–Protected Archaeological Areas, e.g., Ship Wrecks
–Submerged Archaeological Sites
RELIGION	–Ceremonial Sites
–Sites for Collecting Food/Materials for Ceremonies
–Taboo Areas
RESEARCH	–Scientific Reference Sites




Annex F: SUMMARY OF DATA SETS TO SUPPORT MSP 
ADMINISTRATION
Maritime Boundaries
?Maritime baseline
?Territorial sea
?EEZ
?Extended continental shelf
?Boundaries agreed with neighbouring States
Internal Boundaries
?Administrative boundaries (e.g. LGA)
?Boundaries between Zanzibar and Mainland Tanzania
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS AND RESOURCES
Marine Habitats
?Seabed classification
?Benthic habitats (eg., coral reefs, rocky reef, seagrass etc)
?Coastal habitats and resources (e.g., mangroves)
Oceanography
?Hydrography/topography
?Seabed type
?Sea surface temperature
?Primary production
?Coastal and ocean circulation
?Upwelling areas
Marine Living Resources
?Marine mammal distribution
?Marine mammal nursery areas
?Turtle feeding areas
?Turtle breeding sites
?Pelagic fish species and distributions 
?Demersal fish species and distribution
?Benthic species and distribution
?Fish spawning grounds and nursery areas
Conservation Areas
?Designated protected sites
?Locally Managed Marine Areas
?Underwater cultural heritage sites
MARINE USES & ACTIVITIES
Fisheries
?Fishing areas (gear specific)
?Temporal/spatial/gear specific closure areas
?BMUs
?CFAs
?Fish landing sites
?Aquaculture/mariculture areas
Mineral Extraction
?Offshore petroleum areas
?Deep sea minerals
?Shall marine aggregates and sand mining
Ports and Shipping
?Primary and secondary ports
?Marinas
?Shipping and ferry routes
?Marine dumping areas
Tourism
?Coastal tourism sites
?Diving and snorkelling sites
?Eco-tourism areas
?Sailing and water sports areas
Subsea Infrastructure
?Subsea pipelines
?Sub-sea cables (telecommunications/power)
Livelihoods, Traditional Use and Cultural Heritage
?Locally managed marine areas
?Cultural heritage/religious sites