4SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS
An important early step in any MSP process is to identify and analyse the existing conditions (baseline) against which planning will be undertaken. This provides information on the current physical, biological, social, economic and governance characteristics of the marine plan area.
An important task is the identification and mapping of ecologically or biologically significant areas. Not only is this important for understanding those areas that might warrant protection through a planning process but for planning purposes, the environmental characteristics can also be used to divide the national territory into different planning regions, particularly in countries with extensive maritime territory.
Another important task is compiling information and mapping the spatial and temporal distribution and density of important human activities. Important human uses include tourism, fisheries; aquaculture, marine transportation; renewable and non-renewable energy production; and sand and gravel mining, among others.
This chapter therefore provides an overview of the situation in terms of ecologically significant areas and human uses of the marine environment that can be used to assess the current conditions of the planning area in relation to the different aspects that characterise the socio-ecological system under analysis. Where possible the project team has provided maps to illustrate the spatial extent of key resources and habitats.
4.1Climate and Oceanography
The climate of the coastal region is characterized by tropical humid conditions which is strongly influenced by the seasonal monsoon wind regime. Seasonal climatic patterns along the coast of Tanzania align with regional monsoon wind systems prevailing across the WIO.  Accordingly, a south-easterly (SE) monsoon prevails from May to October and a north-easterly (NE) monsoon prevails from December to March. The SE monsoon period is cooler, winds are usually stronger and predominantly southerly. The NE monsoon period is warmer and winds are lighter and predominantly northerly (Figure 7). Coastal Tanzania has a bimodal rainfall pattern, also driven by the two monsoon seasons. The onset of the SE monsoon drives the main rainy season during March-May and the onset of the NE monsoon drives lighter and less reliable rainfall during November-December. The predominant climate trends observed in recent years include delayed onset and lighter rainfall in November-December, and shorter but more intense rainfall during March-May. 

Figure 7:  Wind speed and direction during the northeast (left panel) and southeast (right panel) monsoon along the coastal and marine waters of Tanzania. The size of the arrows denotes wind speed.

The dominant current prevailing along the Tanzanian coast is the East African Coastal Current (EACC), which flows northwards throughout the year. The EACC originates from the South Equatorial Current (SEC) which flows all year round from east to west across the Indian Ocean, across the northern tip of Madagascar and hitting the Eastern African coast at around 12°S, around the Tanzania-Mozambique. There, the current bifurcates northwards to drive the EACC and southwards to drive the Mozambique Current towards South Africa (Figure 8). There are also diverse counter currents in Tanzania’s internal waters driven by a 3-4m tidal range and the interaction of the EACC with nearshore physical features, especially around Unguja and Mafia islands. The EACC is strongest during the period April to October when it is accelerated by the SE monsoon winds. During the period between November and March, the current is weaker, as it is impeded by the northeast (NE) monsoon winds.
The EACC influences a region containing important and highly productive mangrove forests, seagrass beds, coral reef ecosystems and estuaries which collectively sustain high levels of biodiversity. As a result, the URT’s coastal waters are endowed with a high diversity of coastal and marine resources.

Figure 8: The pathway of the East Africa Coastal Current along the coastal waters of Tanzania during the northeast (left panel) and southeast (right panel) monsoon. 
4.2Marine Habitats and Resources
The Eastern African coast is broadly a relatively low nutrient environment. This is due to an absence of  significant deep-ocean upwelling along its continental shelf – the SEC being a surface current. It is this factor that makes the Tanzanian coast broadly conducive to coral community dominance, except around the major river outflows of Rufiji, Pangani, Ruvuma and Wami where, conversely, a higher nutrient environment allows mangrove and soft-sediment habitats flourish.  These factors endow the coastal waters of the URT with a high diversity of coastal and marine habitats including fringing limestone platforms, coral reefs, mangrove forests, seagrass beds, sandy beaches, major estuaries, and muddy tidal flats. These habitats support many species of fish including sharks and rays, cetaceans, turtles, corals, other marine invertebrates, seagrasses and mangroves. These provide a range of ecosystem services such as the provision of food, supporting livelihoods, and protection of coastal areas from the worst impacts of climate change. 
These ecosystems support economic and social development and underpin the livelihoods of coastal communities, who rely heavily on the sea for their food and income. These ecosystems are characterized by high marine biodiversity and rich marine and coastal resources (ASCLME, 2012). 
4.2.1Coastal and shallow reef habitats
Coral reefs
Coral reefs support one of the most productive and diverse marine ecosystems in Tanzanian waters. Mostly comprised of fringing and patch reefs, the coral reefs of URT cover an estimated 3,580 km2, and are found along at least two thirds of the country’s coastline - the largest area covered by coral reefs in the entire Eastern Africa (Wagner, 2004). Due to narrowness of the continental shelf, the coral reefs are generally situated near the shoreline within a distance of 1-3 km along the coast (Figure 9).

Figure 9: Distribution of coral reefs throughout the URT. Data source: UNEP-WCMC (2016).
The islands of Unguja, Pemba and Mafia, as well as numerous small islands along the coast, are for the most part surrounded by fringing reefs. The areas of greatest concentration of coral reefs are Tanga, Pemba, Unguja, Mafia, the Songosongo archipelago and Mtwara (Tanzania Coastal Management Partnership [TCMP], 2001a). In areas around river mouths, an absence of suitable rocky substrate and excessive freshwater, sediment and nutrient discharge prevent the development of coral reefs.
Coral reefs in the URT are characterized by a broad diversity of both species and formation types, with approximately 150 species of hard, reef-building corals identified. This structural complexity and ecologically diverse habitats are essential to large numbers of both resident and transient marine life - over 500 species of commercially important fish and other invertebrates are commonly found in coral reefs, supporting  a significant proportion of artisanal fish yields. They also serve as a natural barrier that restrain beach erosion and slow down waves reaching the shore; and provide aesthetic attractions for eco-tourism opportunities. 
According to the recent National Environmental Master Plan for Strategic Interventions (Office of the Vice President, 2022) information about the status of coral reefs is mostly only available for MPAs, but elsewhere is limited. An assessment conducted by Marine Parks and Reserves Unit between 1999 and 2021 observed a gradual increase of coral cover in Mafia Island Marine Park and Tanga Coelacanth Marine Park, but a slight decrease in Dar es Salaam Marine Reserves (Office of the Vice President, 2022). 
Notwithstanding the lack of data for areas beyond these MPAs, there is evidence that, over the past few decades, the URT’s coral reefs have suffered significant degradation, in particular from blast-fishing (largely in Mainland Tanzania), other fishing pressures and climate impacts (Office of the Vice President, 2022). The most degraded coral reefs are those in shallow depths (less than 10 m), especially near urban centres such as Tanga, Dar es Salaam, and Mtwara. More pristine reefs can be found in less accessible stretches of the coast and at greater depths, such as eastern  fringing reefs in Kilwa, Mafia, Mtwara and Pemba.  Climate impacts have impacted coral reefs in URT, in line with regional and global trends, in particular by post-El Nino high sea surface temperature (SST) events, in 1998, 2007 and 2016.  During the first-recorded global coral bleaching event in 1998, some reefs in Tanzania lost up to 80% of hard coral cover at the most impacted sites. The subsequent major bleaching events in 2007 and 2016 also resulted in  coral loss, although impacts were less than anticipated. Broadly however, coral cover at long-term reef monitoring sites in Tanga, Mafia and Zanzibar has shown a trajectory of medium-term recovery since 1998, indicating that coral communities are at least partially adapting to heat stress over time.
There have also been government initiatives to address the decline of coral habitats. Dedicated efforts by Mainland government enforcement agencies during 2016-18 virtually eliminated blast-fishing in Mainland Tanzania to less than 5% of pre-2016 levels. It currently persists only in some parts of Tanga. If maintained, this will be contribute significantly to coral reef well-being.  Equally, the relatively better condition of coral reefs in Mainland marine parks and at sites like Misali and Chumbe Islands in Zanzibar reflects positively on management efforts by MPA authorities and stakeholder partners. Strategy instruments such as the National Environmental Masterplan for Strategic Interventions further contain specific measures to enhance coral reef conservation in future, including strengthening MPA management effectiveness.
Seagrass
Seagrass meadows are an important indicator species of the overall health of coastal ecosystems, due to their high biodiversity and sensitivity to changes in water quality. They primarily grow between the intertidal and subtidal zones, typically near coral reefs and mangrove forests. Seagrass beds are highly productive and serve many ecological functions, including:
•as primary producers in the food chain of the reef community;
•in fixing nitrogen and storing atmospheric carbon;
•in providing habitats – feeding, breeding, recruitment sites and nursery grounds – for juveniles and adults of reef organisms including the major commercial species;
•in reducing sediment movement in nearshore waters and removing sediments from the water column;
•in decreasing turbidity of the water; and
•in stabilizing the coastline.
A total of 12 seagrass species are found in the URT, which are thought to be widely distributed in inter-tidal and sub-tidal mud and sand flats coastal lagoons, sandy areas around the bases of shallow, patch and fringing reefs, and mangrove creeks exposed to low tide. They are found in abundance in sheltered areas of the coast in Tanga, the tidal zones fronting the deltas of Ruvu, Wami and Rufiji rivers and around Kilwa. They also occur in Pemba, Unguja and Mafi a islands (Ruitenbeek et al. 2005) (see Figure 10 below). The most extensive seagrass meadows occur in back-reef lagoons, between the beaches or cliffs and the adjacent fringing reefs (Gullström et al. 2021).  

Figure 10: Distribution of seagrass resources throughout the URT. Data source: UNEP-WCMC (2016).
It should be noted, however, that the precise areas covered by seagrass beds and the relative species densities in Tanzania are not well mapped, limiting the ability to effectively manage and protect this important coastal ecosystem. However, the project team is aware of a current WIOMSA-supported study being undertaken by the University of Dar es Salaam which aims to update mapping of seagrass habitats in the vicinity of Tanga, Bagamoyo, Dar es Salaam, Mafia Island, and Mtwara. Once completed, it will be important that this data is integrated into other existing spatial datasets.
Their most notable role is to provide breeding, nursery and feeding grounds for many invertebrates and fish species. Seagrass beds also support complex food webs both through dead and living biomass. The fish and shrimp communities associated with seagrass beds are important to both the artisanal and industrial fishery (TCMP, 2001a). In the URT, seagrass meadows are particularly important feeding grounds for sea turtles. Studies of dugong distribution and migration along the Tanzania coast also show that they are associated with areas of extensive seagrass beds particularly in the Rufiji delta and Mafia-Kilwa area which has a viable dugong population (ASCLME, 2012).
Seagrass beds across the URT are threatened by a range of natural and human activities that include climate change, tourism, mangrove deforestation, expanding seaweed farms, semi-industrial, small-scale commercial and industrial trawling for inshore crustaceans, illegal trawling for fish and crustaceans during the closed season, invertebrate gleaning, waste disposal, unsuitable farming practices and coastal development. 
Mangroves
Mangroves are found at the intersection between land and marine environment. They provide a range of ecosystem services including:
•Protecting shorelines by trapping sediments eroded from the land and also against wave erosion;
•Protecting the extensive coral reef system that comprises of coral reefs and sea grasses;
•Providing a buffer to sea surge and flooding caused by severe storm events and tsunamis;
•Providing a critical habitat for juvenile fish and invertebrate species which may increase the biomass of coral reef fish communities;
•Providing a habitat for a broad diversity of birds, fish, crustaceans, reptiles and mammal species; 
•Providing food, timber, fuel and medicine to people; and
•Sequestering atmospheric carbon in marine sediments , thereby reducing the impacts of global carbon emissions (so called Blue Carbon). 
Nine species of mangrove are found in mainland Tanzania and ten in Zanzibar (Tanzanian Forest Services Agency [TFSA], 2022; MNRT, 2021). Tanzania accounts for roughly 1% of mangrove coverage worldwide. These forests are found in the tidal inlets, estuaries and creeks along the mainland coast, as well as in Zanzibar. 
According to Mangora et al. (2016), there are four types of mangrove forests in Tanzania: 
(i)Riverine mangroves in the Rufiji Delta and estuaries of Pangani, Wami, Ruvu and Ruvuma rivers; 
(ii)Lagoon mangroves formed in and around semi-enclosed bodies of water and receive seasonal freshwater delivery like those of Mkinga, Tanga, Kipumbwi-Sange, Bagamoyo-Dar es Salaam-Mkurunga, Kilwa-Lindi-Mtwara; 
(iii)Coastal fringing mangroves which are, purely driven by the functions of tidal forcing around major islands of Mafia, Pemba and Unguja; and 
(iv)Overwash mangroves that are characteristic on the numerous small islands around Pemba.
Mangrove forests in the country are divided into three major management zones which are the Northern Zone, comprising mangroves of Tanga Region; Central Zone, comprising mangroves of Dar es Salaam and coast region; and the Southern Zone, comprising mangroves of Lindi and Mtwara Region (Office of the Vice President, 2022). According to official MNRT records of 2015, mangrove areas in Tanzania mainland covers 158,000 ha, although former official records of 1990 indicate an area of 115, 000 ha (Table 2), making the country the third in Eastern Africa in terms of mangrove coverage, following from Madagascar and Mozambique.
The project teams has identified, during the preparation of this scoping study, that different official and unofficial estimates exist for the extent of the URT’s mangrove distribution and abundance. The most recent Government data from 2015 indicates that overall the extent of mangroves has increased although in some regions the areal extent has clearly decreased (Table 2 below). There is a need to clarify and confirm the current spatial extent of mangroves throughout the URT.



Table 2: Coverage of mangrove forest by districts & sub-regions. Data sources: Tanzania Forest Service, UNEP-WCMC
Region	District/ Municipalities	Area (ha) 1989
(MNRT/Semesi)	Area (ha) 2015
(NAFORMA)	Area (ha) 2016
(UNEP-WCMC)

Tanga	Mkinga ,Tanga City and Muheza	9,403	
TFS Northern Zone
1,701 ha


TFS Eastern Zone
125,418 ha


TFS Southern Zone
30,981 ha	8,452
	Pangani	1,756		2,060
Dar es Salaam	Ilala, Kinondoni & Kigamboni	2,253		1,426
Pwani	Bagamoyo	5,636		3,424
	Mkuranga	3,858		5,107
	Mafia	3,473		2,575
	Kibiti/Rufiji	53,255		41,227
Lindi	Kilwa	22,429		23,353
	Lindi Town, Mtama	4,547		4,027
Mtwara	Mtwara	8,942		8,652
Mainland sub-total (ha)	115,5120	158,100	100,395

Region	Sub-region	Area (ha) 1997
(Leskinen et al.)	Area (ha) 2015
(NAFORMA)	Area (ha) 2016
(UNEP-WCMC)
Zanzibar	Unguja	5,929	n/a	3,390
	Pemba	13,919	n/a	7,615
Zanzibar sub-total (ha)	19,848		11,005

In the country, the largest contiguous area of mangrove forest, covering an area of about 53000 ha, approximately 50% of all mangroves is found in the Rufiji Delta. Other important mangrove sites in the country  include deltas and estuaries of the Pangani, Wami, Ruvu and Ruvuma rivers and the coasts of Unguja, Pemba and Mafia islands (TCMP, 2001) (Figure 11). Mangroves make an important contribution to the economy of the URT and the livelihoods of coastal citizens representing up to US$10.3 million per year in the direct use of natural resources for the Rufiji Delta alone (Mangrove Alliance, 2019). The relatively good condition and high species diversity in the mangrove communities provides important ecological and socio-economic services. Commercial fisheries of crabs, prawns and fish are directly dependent on the mangrove ecosystems thus, the two main prawn fishing grounds are areas adjacent to the Rufiji Delta and Bagamoyo. Likewise, the fishing for crab is an important activity in the Pangani river mangroves. It is estimated that over 150,000 people make their living directly from mangrove resources in Tanzania (Mangrove Alliance, 2019). 
This notwithstanding, mangroves across the country are under threat due to high demand for mangrove products such as firewood, charcoal, building, and boat making. In addition to commercial cutting and over harvesting, coral burning, lime production, salt making, clear-cutting for building sites, solar salt pans, commercial projects and clearance for agriculture (ASCLME, 2012) as well as clearance for coastal development, coral stone mining and boat making. Natural factors such as flooding and coastal erosion have also contributed to declines in area coverage in key areas. A study on mangrove cover change detection in Rufiji observed a loss of mangroves from 51,941 ha to 45,519 ha from 1989 to 2015 (Monga et al., 2018). The result has been attributed to continued destruction of mangroves due to rice farming and demand for timber in the Rufiji Delta (Office of the Vice President, 2022). 

Figure 11: Distribution of mangrove forests throughout the URT. Data source: UNEP-WCMA (2016).
With the recognition of their national importance, mangrove areas in Mainland Tanzania have been designated as forest reserves since 1928. While in Zanzibar mangroves are conserved under the Forest Resources Management and Conservation Act of 1996, Fisheries Act of 2010 with associated Marine Conservation Unit Regulations of 2014, and Environmental Management Act of 2015. 
The URT has recognised the critical role that coastal resources (including mangroves) play to people and nature including with the inclusion in its updated Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) which includes a number of adaptation contributions for Coastal, marine Environment and Fisheries as one of its actions to increase the resilience of infrastructure (Government of the URT, 2021):
a) Strengthening management of coastal and marine resources and monitoring systems.
b) Promoting sustainable livelihood diversification for coastal communities.
c) Enhancing area-based management systems for sustainable blue economy
4.2.2Pelagic ecosystems 
Beyond the narrow continental shelf areas of the coast, the offshore waters of the URT’s EEZ contain extensive deep-water areas, where water depths drop rapidly to more than 1,000 m close to the seaward side of the coast. Of the total area of the EEZ, over 92% is deep sea (>200 m) and 72% is deeper than 2000 m (Gates et al. 2021). The maximum depth within the EEZ is 4,106 m.
Some surveys of benthic habitats have been carried out, and recent research has found evidence of a seamount and deep-water canyons that fringe much of the URT’s continental shelf, particularly in the south. The importance of such features is that they can be hotspots for biodiversity (for example as a habitat for the coelacanth), they can also be the focus of localised upwelling and pelagic fish aggregation. Such physical features could potentially be a basis for future offshore MPAs, however these features remain under-studied and that  more research is needed (Masalu, 2008; Gates et al. 2021). 
The URT’s offshore pelagic ecosystems, both in the EEZ and territorial waters, are of principal economic importance for tuna and tuna-like fisheries. Industrial fishing effort in the EEZ has varied significantly over the past decade, but peaked during 2014-16. During that period, average annual tuna catches reported by industrial vessels were 13,888 MT, 80% from purse-seiners and 20% from long-liners. The predominant species caught were skipjack (43%), yellowfin tuna (37%) and bigeye tuna (16%) (Mbukwa et al., 2019). During the same period, recorded artisanal landings of tuna and tuna-like species, mostly from gillnetting in territorial waters, were 9,748 MT/yr. 
Pelagic fisheries productivity varies seasonally as it is mainly dependent on phytoplankton abundance, which flourishes when waters are warm. EEZ tuna catches peak during October to February (Shaghude et al., 2021). There is also spatial variation; there is a hotspot for yellowfin tuna in the southern part of Tanzania’s EEZ boundary line with Comoros; for skipjack tuna in the central EEZ; and for Bigeye tuna in the northern EEZ on the border with Kenya (see also Section 4.5.2 and Figure 12 below). These hotspots are driven by multiple factors including primary production, ocean currents and sea surface temperature (Shaghude et al., 2021). Other marine life such as cetaceans and turtles also transit the deep sea on seasonal and multi-annual migrations (Gates et al., 2021). 
	
Figure 12: Spatial distribution of longline fishing (a) and purse seine fishing (b) events in the EEZ of Tanzania. Source: Shaghude et al. (2021). 

4.2.3Marine species and biodiversity
Various important and valued species are found along the coast, including an estimated 150 species of corals in 13 families; 10 mangrove species; 300 species of seaweed and 12 of seagrasses, 8,000 species of invertebrates; 1,000 species of fish; five species of marine turtles; at least 20 species of marine mammals; and many seabird species (ASCLME, 2012).  Coral reefs and associated habitats also support species such as marine turtles, dugongs, rays, whale sharks, and others (Shao et al. 2003). However, these are undoubtedly affected by local degradation and degree of fishing intensity and up to date studies appear to be needed.
The URT’s offshore waters also support diverse charismatic megafauna including as many as 28 species of cetacean and five of the seven species of marine turtles, although few surveys on the occurrence and distribution of cetaceans have been conducted in the coastal waters of Zanzibar (Unguja and Pemba Islands) and Tanzania (Amir et al. 2005). The waters of East Africa are also a major hotspot for sharks and rays, with nearly 200 species recorded (UNEP-Nairobi Convention/WIOMSA, 2015). Several areas, such as the Pemba Channel, are known to be biodiversity hotpots for Cetacea and some species of sharks. Mafia Island also supports globally significant populations of whale shark and manta rays with a number of aggregation sites being around the island (see Figure 13). 
In the context of EEZ fisheries, the main value species in the EEZ are tropical tuna and tuna-like species that seasonally migrate into URT waters. Overall catches over the EEZ are dominated by three fish groups: the Yellowfin tuna, Bigeye tuna, and Swordfish. Other less common groups were the Black Marlin and Sharks and minor groups were the Skipjack and Sailfish (Shaghude et al. 2021).
A number of species in the URT are globally threatened or are listed on the CITES appendices and require particular protection and monitoring. 
•Perhaps the most iconic species from the area is the Coelacanth, of which a genetically distinct population has been found in the waters of the URT. Unlike other areas of the WIO, where the species typically resides in deep water caves, the waters of the URT lacks caves. Instead, the species inhabits rocky terraces in somewhat shallower locations than in other parts of the WIO. This leaves the Tanzanian coelacanth population in the URT with potentially less protection than other populations.
•Prior to the mid-1970s, dugongs were both abundant and widely distributed along the Tanzania coast. Over the past 30 years however, dugong numbers have declined dramatically and, until recently, dugongs were thought to have disappeared from northern Tanzania - their former stronghold. However, even though sightings are rare, there is clear evidence that a small breeding population exists, associated with areas of extensive seagrass beds particularly in the Rufiji delta and Mafia-Kilwa area. Dugong is one of the most endangered species on the African continent and is on the IUCN Red list.
•Among animal groups that are internationally threatened are populations of green and hawksbill turtles; the URT being an important nesting area for both species. The extensive seagrass beds off the southern Rufiji Delta are important feeding grounds for green turtles. On Mafia Island, immature and adult green and hawksbill turtles are found in Chole Bay and along the east coast of Juani Island where seagrass and corals occur (ASCLME, 2012).

Figure 13: Location of important biodiversity sites. Data source: Institute of Marine Sciences.
4.3Multilateral Environmental Agreements
4.3.1International agreements
The URT is signatory to several international conventions and protocols that advocate the establishment of spatial management tools for biodiversity conservation and regulation of fisheries. Annex B lists all relevant international agreements to which the URT is a party. Notable among these are: the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (hereafter ‘UNCLOS’); the Convention on Biological Diversity (‘the CBD’); the Jakarta Mandate of which outlines the program of action for marine and coastal biodiversity within the CBD; the  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the 2015 Paris Agreement adopted under the UNFCC; the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS); on the and a range of sector-specific instruments adopted by agencies such as the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) (such as the 1993 FAO Compliance Agreement). 
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982
The principal international legal framework governing the oceans is provided by the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which establishes a comprehensive scheme for the use and development of the oceans. The UNCLOS defines the extent of various jurisdictional zones in offshore areas and sets out the rights and obligations of countries on the basis of those zones. Countries have sovereignty over their internal waters, territorial seas and archipelagic waters, whilst in the EEZ, states have sovereign rights for exploration, exploitation, conservation and management of natural resources and over other economic activities and jurisdiction over the protection and preservation of the marine environment. On the continental shelf, states have sovereign rights for exploration and exploitation of non-living resources and sedentary living resources on the seabed. 
The UNCLOS establishes an overall framework of governing principles and general obligations for the future protection and governance of the ocean. These include a general, and unqualified, obligation to protect and preserve the marine environment, including the obligation to protect and preserve rare or fragile ecosystems, as well as the habitat of depleted, threatened or endangered species and other forms of life as well as obligations relating to marine scientific research, conservation of living marine resources, monitoring risks or effects of pollution, and to minimize pollution and accidents to the fullest possible extent. 
At a broad level UNCLOS fixes international obligations for States to protect the marine environment in three main ways: 
(1)	Governments are explicitly obligated to protect and preserve the marine environment. Governments have the duty not to pollute the marine environment and must not condone the actions of nationals that do;
(2)	Governments are obligated to cooperate on both a global and regional basis. This involves a fundamental commitment to make rules, regulations and standards that underpin the obligation to protect and preserve the marine environment; and
(3)	Governments are obligated to adopt, enact and enforce at the national level, internationally agreed-upon standards for protecting the marine environment.
The duty to protect and preserve the marine environment includes the obligation that: “measures must include measures to protect and preserve rare or fragile ecosystems, as well as the habitats of depleted, threatened or endangered species and other forms of life.”  
Convention on Biological Diversity, 1992
The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) is also especially relevant as an international treaty that calls for conservation of all biodiversity. At the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties, parties adopted a revised and updated Strategic Plan for Biodiversity, including the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, for the 2011-2020 period. This Plan provides an overarching framework on biodiversity, not only for the biodiversity-related conventions, but for the entire United Nations system and all other partners engaged in biodiversity management and policy development. Parties agreed to translate this overarching international framework into revised and updated national biodiversity strategies and action plans within two years.
Included in the Strategic Plan, the following Targets are of particular importance to spatial management in the marine environment:
Target 6: By 2020 all fish and invertebrate stocks and aquatic plants are managed and harvested sustainably, legally and applying ecosystem based approaches, so that overfishing is avoided, recovery plans and measures are in place for all depleted species, fisheries have no significant adverse impacts on threatened species and vulnerable ecosystems and the impacts of fisheries on stocks, species and ecosystems are within safe ecological limits; and
Target 11: By 2020, at least 17 percent of terrestrial and inland water, and 10 percent of coastal and marine areas, especially areas of particular importance for biodiversity and ecosystem services, are conserved through effectively and equitably managed, ecologically representative and well-connected systems of protected areas and other effective area-based conservation measures and integrated into the wider landscape and seascapes.[ 	https://www.cbd.int/sp/targets. ] 
It is noted that the Secretariat of the CBD is currently undertaking consultations with States party to the Convention on a post-2020 biodiversity framework. As such, it is anticipated that new targets will be adopted in the near future.
Subject to the Convention, each Party is required to take action to protect components of coastal and marine biodiversity within its national jurisdiction. Coastal States can exercise jurisdictional rights over their marine waters as defined by UNCLOS. As such, the CBD’s obligations apply within these maritime zones, insofar as they are consistent with rights and obligations under UNCLOS.  Thus the creation and management of spatial management tools pursuant to the CBD must be consistent with these rights and obligations, such as the right of innocent passage and the rights of coastal States to establish and enforce measures for the conservation of marine living resources within their zones of jurisdictions. 
The CBD places great emphasis on in situ conservation, calling upon Parties to adopt measures ranging from the establishment of a system of protected areas, to the rehabilitation of degraded ecosystems and the protection of natural habitats and species conservation in natural surroundings. It is these obligations – set out in Articles 6-8 of the Convention - that are the most relevant in the context of MSP. Article 6 requires inter alia Parties to develop national strategies, plans and programmes for the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity. This planning should incorporate a number of sustainable use management tools such as protected areas which are required under Article 8 of the Convention. 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (Agenda 21) 
Agenda 21 is a comprehensive non-binding action of the United Nations with regard to sustainable development. It is an action agenda for the UN, other multilateral organizations, and individual governments around the world that can be executed at local, national, and global levels.
Chapter 17 of Agenda 21 is devoted to the protection of the ocean, seas and coastal areas as well as the protection, rational use and development of their living resources. It proposes a plan of action and how to implement the principle of sustainable development that governments and local authorities can use. 
Programme Area A addresses Integrated management and sustainable development of coastal areas, including exclusive economic zones. In this regard, Objective 17.5 of Agenda 21 requires that coastal states commit themselves to integrated management and sustainable development of coastal areas and the marine environment under their national jurisdiction, including, inter alia:
(a)	Providing for an integrated policy and decision-making process, including all involved sectors, to promote compatibility and a balance of uses;
(b)	Identifying existing and projected uses of coastal areas and their interactions;
(c)	Applying preventive and precautionary approaches in project planning and implementation, including prior assessment and systematic observation of the impacts of major projects; and
(d)	Providing access, as far as possible, for concerned individuals, groups and organizations to relevant information and opportunities for consultation and participation in planning and decision-making at appropriate level.

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) established an international environmental treaty to“ combat "dangerous human interference with the climate” system." The objective of the Convention is to achieve stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. The convention states that such stabilization should be achieved within a time frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change; to ensure that food production is not threatened; and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner. 
The convention provides fundamental principles and obligation of various actors at national level and international levels as well as informs preparation of national reports and other climate change related policies. Among the key principles underlined in UNFCCC includes: -
The Parties should take precautionary measures to anticipate, prevent or minimize the causes of climate change and mitigate its adverse effects. In view of this, policies and measures should take into account different socio-economic contexts, be comprehensive, cover all relevant sources, sinks and reservoirs of greenhouse gases and adaptation, and comprise all economic sectors.
Paris Agreement
The Paris Agreement was adopted under the auspices of the UNFCC with the goal of limiting global warming to well below 2, preferably to 1.5 degrees Celsius, compared to pre-industrial levels. To achieve this long-term temperature goal, countries aim to reach global peaking of greenhouse gas emissions as soon as possible to achieve a climate neutral world by mid-century.
Implementation of the Paris Agreement requires economic and social transformation, based on the best available science. The Agreement requires countries to reassess their carbon reduction commitments every five years, where there will be an issuance of new greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction targets in five-year cycles, beginning in 2020. As such, by 2020, countries were required to submit their plans for climate action known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs). In their NDCs, countries communicate actions they will take to reduce their Greenhouse Gas emissions in order to reach the goals of the Agreement. Countries also communicate in the NDCs actions they will take to build resilience to adapt to the impacts of rising temperatures. 
To better frame the efforts towards the long-term goal, the Paris Agreement invites countries to formulate and submit by 2020 long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies (LT-LEDS). LT-LEDS provide the long-term horizon to the NDCs. Unlike NDCs, they are not mandatory. Nevertheless, they place the NDCs into the context of countries’ long-term planning and development priorities, providing a vision and direction for future development.
Article 7 of the Paris Agreement establishes a global goal on adaptation – of enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to climate change in the context of the temperature goal of the Agreement. It aims to significantly strengthen national adaptation efforts, including through support and international cooperation. It recognizes that adaptation is a global challenge faced by all. All Parties should engage in adaptation, including by formulating and implementing National Adaptation Plans, and should submit and periodically update an adaptation communication describing their priorities, needs, plans and actions. The adaptation efforts of developing countries should be recognized
Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals
The Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS) provides a global platform for the conservation and sustainable use of migratory animals and their habitats. CMS brings together the States through which migratory animals pass, the Range States, and lays the legal foundation for internationally coordinated conservation measures throughout a migratory range.
Migratory species threatened with extinction are listed on Appendix I of the Convention. CMS Parties strive towards strictly protecting these animals, conserving or restoring the places where they live, mitigating obstacles to migration and controlling other factors that might endanger them. Besides establishing obligations for each State joining the Convention, CMS promotes concerted action among the Range States of many of these species.
Migratory species that need or would significantly benefit from international co-operation are listed in Appendix II of the Convention. For this reason, the Convention encourages the Range States to conclude global or regional agreements. Such agreements may range from legally binding treaties (called Agreements) to less formal instruments, such as Memoranda of Understanding, and can be adapted to the requirements of particular regions. The development of models tailored according to the conservation needs throughout the migratory range is a unique capacity to CMS.
In 2014 the 11th meeting of the Conference of Parties adopted Strategic Plan for Migratory Species 2015-2023. The Plan includes the following five strategic Goals which are to guide the implementation activities of States:
Goal 1: Address the underlying causes of decline of migratory species by mainstreaming relevant conservation and sustainable use priorities across government and society
Goal 2: Reduce the direct pressures on migratory species and their habitats
Goal 3: Improve the conservation status of migratory species and the ecological connectivity and resilience of their habitats
Goal 4: Enhance the benefits to all from the favourable conservation status of migratory Species
Goal 5: Enhance implementation through participatory planning, knowledge management and capacity building
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
The last twenty years have seen tremendous increase in environmental awareness, which culminated with the adoption, in 2015, of the 2030 Agenda for International Development, and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Of these, Goal 14 (Life Below Water; see Box 1) is particularly relevant to the Blue Economy since it addresses many of the issues that need to be addressed for Tanzania to realise its blue economy ambitions.


Box 1: SDG 14: Life Below Water
14.1By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution.
14.2By 2020, sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid significant adverse impacts, including by strengthening their resilience, and take action for their restoration in order to achieve healthy and productive oceans. 
14.3Minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification, including through enhanced scientific cooperation at all levels.
14.4By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices and implement science-based management plans, in order to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible, at least to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield as determined by their biological characteristics.
14.5By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with national and international law and based on the best available scientific information.
14.6By 2020, prohibit certain forms of fisheries subsidies which contribute to overcapacity and overfishing, eliminate subsidies that contribute to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and refrain from introducing new such subsidies, recognizing that appropriate and effective special and differential treatment for developing and least developed countries should be an integral part of the World Trade Organization fisheries subsidies negotiation.
14.7By 2030, increase the economic benefits to Small Island developing States and least developed countries from the sustainable use of marine resources, including through sustainable management of fisheries, aquaculture and tourism.
14.8Increase scientific knowledge, develop research capacity and transfer marine technology, taking into account the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine Technology, in order to improve ocean health and to enhance the contribution of marine biodiversity to the development of developing countries, in particular small island developing States and least developed countries.
14.9Provide access for small-scale artisanal fishers to marine resources and markets.
14.10Enhance the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources by implementing international law as reflected in UNCLOS, which provides the legal framework for the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources, as recalled in paragraph 158 of The Future We Want.

4.3.2Regional policy framework
East African Action Plan and Nairobi Convention
The WIO’s marine space is managed for the countries of the East Africa Region (including the URT) through the Action Plan for the Protection, Management and Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the Eastern Africa region. The Action Plan led to the 1985 adoption of the Nairobi Convention for the Protection, Management and Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the Eastern African Region (Nairobi Convention). 
The Convention, which covers the combined EEZs of its East Africa region parties, provides a mechanism for regional cooperation, coordination and collaborative actions in the Eastern and Southern African region, that enables the Contracting Parties to harness resources and expertise from a wide range of stakeholders and interest groups towards solving interlinked problems of the coastal and marine environment including critical national and transboundary issues. The Convention offers a regional legal framework and coordinates the efforts of the member states to plan and develop programmes that strengthen their capacity to protect, manage and develop their coastal and marine environment sustainably. 
As well as requiring the adoption of measures aimed at preventing and controlling marine pollution from all sources, the Convention also requires parties to take appropriate measures to protect and preserve fragile ecosystems and to assess the environmental impacts of activities under their jurisdiction. The Convention is supplemented by the following protocols:
Protocol Concerning Co-operation in Combating Marine Pollution in Cases of Emergency in the Eastern African Region, adopted in 1985;
Protocol Concerning Protected Areas and Wild Fauna and Flora in the Eastern African Region, adopted in 1985; and
Protocol for the Protection of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the Western Indian Ocean from Land-Based Sources and Activities, adopted in 2010.
The importance of MSP to the Western Indian Ocean (WIO) region is also reflected in the priority afforded the activity under the Nairobi Convention. At its 2015 Meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Nairobi Convention, the parties adopted Decision CP8/10: Blue and Ocean Economy, which urges “Contracting Parties to cooperate in improving the governance of areas beyond national jurisdiction, building on existing regional institutions including the Nairobi Convention and developing area based management tools such as marine spatial planning to promote the blue economy pathways in the Western Indian Ocean Region.”
To support this aspiration, the Secretariat is currently executing the GEF-funded SAPPHIRE Project. A core component of the project is to support the regional development of MSP, both at the national and regional levels. To this end, the Secretariat of the Nairobi Convention, with support from the Western Indian Ocean Marine Sciences Association (WIOMSA) is preparing both the ICZM Protocol  as well as a regional MSP strategy, intended to inform both regional MSP processes as well as to provide a framework to underpin national processes (Metuge et al. 2021). 
Indian Ocean Rim Association
The Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) is a regionally-focussed inter-governmental organisation, established on 7th  March 1997 for the purpose of facilitating and promoting economic co-operation, bringing together inter-alia representatives of Member States’ governments, businesses and academia. IORA seeks to build and expand understanding and mutually beneficial co-operation through a consensus-based, evolutionary and non-intrusive approach.
The blue economy is a key focus area for IORA, as evidenced by the adoption of the IORA Blue Economy Declaration in 2015. The Declaration seeks to harness oceans and maritime resources to drive economic growth, job creation and innovation, while safeguarding sustainability and environmental protection.
Since 2015, several capacity building programmes have been carried out covering a wide range of areas, including inter alia: fisheries and aquaculture; seafood products safety and quality; seafood handling, post-harvest processing and storage of fisheries and aquaculture products; banking and artisanal fisheries; sustainable management and development of fisheries resources; fish trade; seaport and shipping; maritime connectivity; port management and operations; marine spatial planning; ocean forecasting/ observatory; blue carbon; and renewable energy.[ 	https://www.iora.int/media/8248/iora-charter-min.pdf] The IORA Secretariat has identified the following six priority pillars in the blue economy: Fisheries and Aquaculture; Renewable Ocean Energy; Seaports and Shipping; Offshore Hydrocarbons and Seabed Minerals; Marine Biotechnology, Research and Development; and Tourism
Blue economy development in IORA will further be strengthened and is expected to be on the top of IORA’s agenda in the coming years, with the establishment of the Blue Economy Working Group (WGBE), emanating from the IORA Action Plan 2017-2021, that reiterates IORA’s commitment to promote blue economy development in the region as a key source of inclusive economic growth, job creation and education.
4.4National Economic Development Framework and Development Priorities
Recognising the critical contribution that the ocean makes to national development, the URT is prioritising development of the blue economy as part of its broader national framework for economic development. In this regard, the current national economic development frameworks are important in framing the current context for MSP across the URT.
Since the general elections in 2020, the Government, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, has prioritized and formulated key development policies and actions in the major development plans highlighted below. 
•The Tanzania Development Vision 2025
•The URT National Five Year Development Plan 2021/22 – 2025/26
•Zanzibar Development Vision 2050
•Zanzibar Development Plan (2021-2026)
•Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy 2022
In addition, the URT Government is now in the process of developing a comprehensive Blue Economy Policy and Strategy that will support a more wider implementation of the Blue Economy agenda across the URT.
Both Governments have also released numerous specific Sector Development/Strategic Plans (SDPs), including for tourism, environment, fisheries, aquaculture, maritime transport, oil and gas, education, health, energy, waste management, water and sanitation. These have all integrated Agenda 2030 towards achievement of the SDGs.
4.4.1Mainland Tanzania
Tanzania Development Vision 2025
Tanzania’s Vision 2025 (URT, 1995) aims at attaining high quality livelihood for its people and develops a strong and competitive economy, among other things. Some of the strategies toward attaining these objectives are: ensuring food security and self-sufficiency; universal access to safe water; absence of abject poverty; reduction in infant and maternal mortality rates; economic growth rate of 8% per annum or more; attainment of macroeconomic stability; and an adequate level of physical infrastructure. These objectives may not be attained if climate change adaptations concerns are not factored in the development process and mitigation opportunities in the context of sustainable development are not fully exploited.
The URT National Five Year Development Plan, 2021/22-2025/26
The National Five Year Development Plan 2021/22 – 2025/26 (FYDP III) was adopted by the current Government in June 2021. According to the Keynote section, delivered by the President, “The Plan is a continuation of Government’s efforts in achieving the goals we set in the National Development Vision 2025 of our enduring exertion to further improve the standard of living for all Tanzanians.” 
The Tanzania Development Vision 2025 (TDV 2025) was adopted in 1999 and has been implemented through various Programs and The Long-Term Perspective Plan–2011/12 - 2025/26 whose implementation was divided into three phases of the Five-Year National Development Plans. The First Five Year National Development Plan–2011/12 - 2015/16 had a theme of unleashing growth potentials by de-bottlenecking binding constraints to growth. The Second Five Year National Development Plan–2016/17 - 2020/21 focused on nurturing industrialisation for economic transformation and human development. 
The current plan represents the third and final Five-Year National Development Plan, and has a core theme of realising competitiveness and industrialization for human development that aims to increase efficiency and productivity in manufacturing using the resources available in abundance within the Mainland Tanzania. The FYDP III aims to guide the national effort towards the attainment of TDV 2025, making Tanzania a middle-income, competitive and semi-industrialised economy with shared growth and high-quality human development.
The FYDR III is premised on three key pillars, namely:
Good governance
Governance entails a bundle of national priceless values which include: national unity and social cohesion of the people of the United Republic of Tanzania; peace and security; a just and equitable society, upholding human dignity; rule of law; and political stability.
Economic growth
This pillar aims to enable increased productivity and innovation in all sectors of the economy. Both productivity and innovation entail competitiveness at individual, firm and national level, with the expected result export performance. As a key component of this pillar, the FYDP III implicitly recognises the value addition opportunity of a number of blue economy sectors including tourism, fisheries and mineral extraction. 
Social development
Socially inclusive development is seen as a core condition for social stability and mobility of any economic system. To this end, the FYDP III recognises the importance of policies dedicated to: (i) spending on social development (health and education, human settlements, clean & safe water, environment – paying attention to equitable access, gender and people with disabilities and (ii) expanding networks of economic infrastructure, such as roads, power and communication, to potential but hard-to-reach areas of the country and disadvantaged sections of the population. Access to financial services for most poor households in urban and rural areas has been made possible with rapid increase in mobile telephony.
The main detail of the FYDP III is contained within chapter 5 which presents a series of strategic interventions for competitiveness, industrialisation and human development. With regard to the blue economy and MSP, these include interventions relating to inter alia: transport infrastructure, the energy sector, agriculture (including fisheries and aquaculture), environmental and natural resources management, tourism and, specifically, the blue economy.
The FYDP III recognises that implementation of the plan will involve the formulation of numerous policies, guidelines and strategies. Moreover, it is recognised that implementation will require a coordination structure that reflects the broad range of stakeholder interests and the need for a “whole of government” response to many of the challenges identified. This is a particularly relevant issue for the blue economy, which as a subject cuts across numerous different sector agencies and involves multiple stakeholders. The lack of a single coordinating agency for the blue economy in Mainland Tanzania has already been highlighted as a critical issue for implementation of MSP.
4.4.2Zanzibar
Zanzibar Development Vision 2050
The Zanzibar Development Vision 2050 (ZDV 2050) was adopted in 2020. The ZDV 2050 is a continuation and successor of the Zanzibar Development Vision (2020), the State’s first long-term development planning vision for the period 2000-2020, which, among other things, assisted Zanzibar to achieve lower-middle income status during the term of the plan.
The overall Vision set out under the ZDV (2050) is “To attain Upper Middle-Income Status by the year 2050 through sustainable and inclusive human development.” The Vision is shaped by the following four key pillars, each divided into different priority areas.
1.Economic transformation
2.Infrastructure linkages
3.Human capital and social services
4.Governance and resilience
Zanzibar Development Plan (2021-2026)
The Zanzibar Development Plan 2021-2026 (ZADEP) is the first plan to be developed for the implementation of the ZDV 2050. ZADEP’s overarching theme ‘Blue Economy for Inclusive Growth and Sustainable Development’, reflecting prioritisation of blue economy development by the current government of the President of Zanzibar and Chairman of the Revolutionary Council, Dr. Hussein Ali Mwinyi. The ZADEP presents a five-year development pathway built around the following five thematic areas:
1.Exploring blue economy potentials;
2.Enabling environment and infrastructure development;
3.Boosting economic diversification; 
4.Human capital and social development; and
5.Governance and resilience.
For each of these five thematic areas the ZADEP sets out a series of Strategic Interventions and key actions to realise these interventions. The most relevant to the blue economy and MSP are highlighted in Table 3 below.
Table 3: Summary of key strategic interventions from the Zanzibar Development Plan (2021-2026)
EXPLORING BLUE ECONOMY POTENTIALS
Priority Sectors	Strategic Interventions
Overarching	–Enhance coordination of blue economy activities
Fisheries, Aquaculture & Marine Resources	–Enhance development of fishing sector
–Enhance rational management of Marine resources
–Enhance Research & Development for marine resources
–Strengthen international and regional co-operation
Tourism	–Enhance blue tourism in Unguja & Pemba towards a sustainable coastal and maritime tourism 
–Diversify tourism products (sea sports, heritage tourism).
–Enhance visibility of Zanzibar as an up-market tourist destination in
–traditional, emerging and new markets
–Strengthen capacity building to address shortage of skilled labour
–Enhance excellence in service delivery in tourism sector
Seaports & Marine Transportation	–Strengthening port productivity
–Expand passenger handling capacity and clearance
Oil & Gas	–Strengthen the Oil and Gas upstream
–Strengthen the Oil and Gas downstream
ENABLING ENVIRONMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT
Priority Sectors	Strategic Interventions
Energy	–Ensure security of energy supply
Water, Sanitation & Hygiene	–Improve water infrastructure
–Strengthen sanitation, sewerage systems and infrastructure
Information & Communications	–Strengthen the businesses using emerging ICT infrastructure
BOOSTING ECONOMIC DIVERSIFICATION
Priority Sectors	Strategic Interventions
Overarching	–Improve the livelihood of the extremely poor people
Agricultural Production & Productivity	–Strengthen climate resilience and sustainable natural resources
–management
HUMAN CAPITAL AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Priority Sectors	Strategic Interventions
Research & Innovation	–Enhance Research and Development (R&D).
–Enhance Innovation
Social Protection & Employment	–Strengthen employment opportunities and adherence of labour laws
–Establish friendly environment for economic empowerment
–Create employable skills for woman, youth and vulnerable groups
GOVERNANCE AND RESILIENCE
Priority Sectors	Strategic Interventions
Land Utilization & Management	–Ensure equitable and sustainable land use plan and management
The Environment & Climate Change	–Ensure a sustainable waste management system
–Strengthen conservation of Marine and terrestrial biodiversity and its ecosystem
–Strengthening mineral sector
Governing Institutions & Public Services	–Strengthening public participation in decision making process

Given that Zanzibar is essentially a small island state, the ZADEP highlights the clear inter-linkages between the various priority sectors, particularly with regard to the blue economy. In the context of the blue economy thematic areas, MSP is identified as a critical tool for achieving better coordination of blue economy activities. In this context, the Plan highlights, as one of its key visions:
Sustainable exploitation of marine-related resources and products within an operational blue economy framework guided by marine spatial planning, environmental preservation and clear investment procedures.
Achievement of the various strategic interventions relating to the blue economy needs to be considered in the context of the recently adopted Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy.
Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy 2022
The recently adopted Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy (2022) reflects a shift in focus away from the traditional sector-specific approach to managing marine resources and activities to a more integrated manner, that reflects the overall importance that the ocean plays in the socio-economic development of coastal and island nations. It is one of very few such policies adopted globally to date and is, therefore, quite ground-breaking in both its approach and aspiration. This is reflected in the following statement in the Foreword to the policy:
“The realignment of the Blue Economy Policy of Zanzibar comes against the backdrop of the global COVID19 pandemic which has disrupted our economy and livelihoods, affecting local, regional and global supply chains. The Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar… …..has been aggressively pursuing our economic recovery plan by enhancing the potential of our Ocean to transform our country to a better future. For us, the Ocean will always be part of our lives and that Blue Economy is about sustainable development based on our ability to sustain our livelihoods from the Ocean.” (MoBEF, 2022)
The overall goal of the policy is to promote sustainable economic growth, environmental stewardship and improved livelihoods through the sustainable utilisation of the sea and other blue resources.
Specifically, the policy seeks to:
v.i. Strengthen coordination between multiple sectors within the Blue Economy framework;
ii. Promote and improve social inclusion through local community empowerment, with a focus on women, youth, and those with special needs involved in Blue Economy activities;
iii. Ensure safety and security of the maritime domain in coordination with relevant national maritime security agencies;
iv. Improve food and nutritional security through sustainable management of blue resources; and
v. Mobilize resources to harness the potential of ocean and its components to optimize GDP through sustainable Blue Economy initiatives.
The policy focusses on the development of five priority areas within the BE framework, namely:
Sustainable tourism
Fisheries and aquaculture;
Maritime trade and infrastructure;
Renewable energy and oil & gas development; and
Blue economy governance.
Table 4: Summary of key strategic interventions from the Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy 2022
PRIORITY AREA	STRATEGIC INTERVENTION RELEVANT TO MSP
Fisheries & Aquaculture	–Enhancing sustainable fisheries
–Fisheries and aquaculture resources management
–Ecosystem changes due to climate change
–Research in fisheries and aquaculture
Maritime Trade & Infrastructure	–Port infrastructure and related facilities
Renewable Energy & Oil and Gas Development	–Adoption of offshore renewable energy
–Awareness in oil & gas sector
Sustainable Tourism	–Environmental protection of marine hotspots
Blue Economy Governance	–Blue economy coordination
–Maritime safety, security and environmental challenges
–Marine spatial planning
–Blue economy and empowerment of women, youth and people with special needs

For each of these five priority areas, the policy identifies a number of strategic interventions that are needed to operationalise successful implementation of the blue economy. From the perspective of MSP, the most relevant of these are highlighted in Table 4 above. The policy aligns with existing sector-specific policies relating to management of marine resources. Importantly, the policy anticipates and provides for the establishment of an institution to execute and coordinate blue economy-related activities. This will be an important element in the development of any future MSP framework.
Overall, it can be seen the development frameworks for both Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar, in particular, strongly reflect the importance of the blue economy. MSP should therefore be seen, not only as an enabler for the blue economy, but also for the wider national development goals for both territories.
4.5Gender and the Blue Economy
The role of women in the blue economy is particularly important, since women make a significant contribution to employment in the fishery value chain. In the URT women are increasingly involved in fisheries and aquaculture, including in fish trade and octopus fishing among others. Seaweed farming along coastal areas is also an important income generation activity dominated by women, although it is labour intensive and the prices are very low because of the value-chain inequities. Women fishers contribute significantly to household income and food security, and their economic contributions are often the mainstay of family and community sustenance. 
Fisheries, however, remains a traditionally male-dominated sector where women’s contributions are greatly devalued. Furthermore, women’s work in fisheries and aquaculture often lacks formal recognition, and women are vastly underrepresented in policy and decision-making. Across the URT women face barriers compared to men in accessing credit, agriculture inputs, land ownership, and labour.
Empowering women to increase their participation in the blue economy value chain is particularly critical in the URT, where the industry provides livelihoods and contributes to food security and nutrition to a vast majority of the population. The negative impact of COVID-19 on business operations has raised the need to support women who depend on the blue economy to keep their businesses afloat. A recent UN study on Women’s Economic Empowerment in Fisheries in the Blue Economy of the Indian Ocean Rim (UN Women, 2020), reinforces the need for the formal recognition of women’s contributions to the growth and sustainability of this industry. 
The Government has been making efforts in mainstreaming of gender issues into national policies, plans and strategies. The promotion of gender equality in the country is guided mainly by the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), The AU Charter on Human and Peoples Rights, which is reinforced by the Protocol of the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, the AU Gender and Climate Change Policy (2009); and the Southern African Development Community (SADC) Declaration on Gender and Development (1998). 
The URT is committed to addressing gender inequality in all aspects of women’s lives. Gender is integrated into the National Five-Year Development Plan (2021/22- 2025/26) and Zanzibar Development Plan (2021 – 2026), and both the Tanzania Development Vision 2025 and Zanzibar Vision 2050 emphasize the country’s commitment to promoting gender equality in all social, economic, and political contexts. In line with this goal, the government has passed and implemented several policy reforms which have supported greater gender equality and women’s empowerment in terms of blue economy, education, health, employment, access to assets, and protection from violence. 
A number of current initiatives are also worth mentioning:
The URT has  developed a National Plan of Action for Implementation of the Small Scale Fisheries Guideline -- SSF Guidelines (NPOA-SSF Guidelines) which was officially launched in March 2021. The NPOA advocates for the formulation of gender-sensitive policies and regulatory frameworks, designed through consultations and data across the value chain, and promotes gender equality in small-scale fisheries through the formation of a national platform of women organizations for small-scale fisheries (Tanzania Women Fisherfolk Association) which is supported by the establishment of Gender desk at the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries.
The URT is participating in a WIOMSA-led initiative to establish the Women in Marine Science (WiMS) network to coordinate and oversee issue of gender inclusion in the WIO region.
A Coastal Women Fisheries Organization Network (COWOFONET) has been established in the URT which includes a number of women organizations with the representation from all regions and Districts of Indian Ocean in Tanzania Mainland with the aim of empowering coastal communities to take more responsibility for management of local fisheries resources.
Since 2020, UN Women has supported the Government of Zanzibar to ensure gender perspectives are integrated into Zanzibar’s blue economy policies, strategies and plans. This has resulted in the development of the first Blue Economy Gender Strategy and Action Plan in 2022. UN Women has also supported the Zanzibar Government to integrate gender perspectives in the Fisheries Policy of 2022, and is implementing various initiatives geared towards enhancing the participation of women in blue economy sectors through a joint programme undertaken with FAO, IFAD and WFP.
Moreover, UN Women has recently launched a 4-year project on strengthening women’s and girls’ meaningful participation, leadership, and economic rights (WLER) at local levels. Although not specifically focussed on the blue economy, this $9 million project, supported by the Government of Finland, will be implemented in 18 districts in six regions of Tanzania, including Arusha, Dar es Salaam, Coast (Pwani), Lindi, Mtwara and Singida.
This progress notwithstanding, in order to reach the full potential of the blue economy, more support will be needed to support the expansion of business and employment opportunities for women. In this regard, MSP offers a unique opportunity to mainstream gender into the development of future planning and decision-making for the development and utilisation of marine and coastal resources throughout the URT. 
4.6
Overview, Policy & Legal Frameworks of Key Blue Economy Sectors
4.5.1.Marine biodiversity conservation & climate change adaptation (Key BE Sector #1)
The URT has a long history of conservation planning, both terrestrial and marine. As a result, an extensive network of protected areas already exists throughout the country. To support these, a broad range of spatial management measures are available, for controlling the different marine uses and activities, under different legal instruments and that could be included in a MSP initiative (Annex E). 
Marine Protected Areas
According to the most recent MPA assessments undertaken by the Secretariat of the Nairobi Convention in collaboration with WIOMSA a total of 25 MPAs have been established across the URT (19 in Mainland Tanzania and 6 in Zanzibar). 
Mainland Tanzania MPAs
In the case of Mainland Tanzania, two main types of marine protected area are recognised, namely Marine Parks (3) and Marine Reserves (15) (Table 5 and Figure 14 below). In addition, there is one coastal terrestrial national park which has a gazetted marine area. In the context of the URT’s international obligations to conserve marine biodiversity, the current network of MPAs in Mainland Tanzania covers a total area of 2,209 km2, constituting 7.66% of Tanzania’s marine internal waters or 0.9% of all maritime waters. 149 out of the 2,209 km2 is designated as no-take reserves. Also within the marine realm, all mangrove forests in Tanzania Mainland are gazetted as forest reserves.
Table 5: Marine protected areas in Mainland Tanzania. Source: UNEP- Nairobi Convention/WIOMSA (2021a).
CONSERVATION AREA	MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES	DATE	AREA (km2)
Mafia Island Marine Park	Marine biodiversity conservation & fisheries management	1995	822
Mnazi Bay/Ruvuma Estuary Marine Park	Co-existence of biodiversity conservation & gas extraction	2000	650
Tanga Coelacanth Marine Park	Conservation of coelacanth	2009	522
Bongoyo Island Marine Reserve	Small island preservation and conservation of corals	1975	9.15
Mbudya Island Marine Reserve	Conservation of locally endangered coconut crab	1975	14.22
Pangavini Island Marine Reserve	Conservation of corals and seagrass	1975	2.13
Fungu-Yasini Marine Reserve	Sandbank preservation and conservation of corals	1975	22.9
Makatumbe Island Marine Reserve	Conservation of corals and seagrass	2007	7.78
Sinda Island Marine Reserve	Conservation of breeding ground of the endangered Hawksbill and Green turtles	2007	1.8
Kendwa Island Marine Reserve	Small island preservation and conservation of corals	2007	5.3
Ulenge Island Marine Reserve	Conservation of indigenous and migratory birds	2010	3.16
Mwewe Island Marine Reserve	Conservation of mangroves and corals	2010	0.4
Kirui Island Marine Reserve	Conservation and corals and seagrasses	2010	36.1
Kwale Island Marine Reserve	Conservation of indigenous and migratory birds	2010	12.13
Maziwe Island Marine Reserve	Conservation of breeding ground of endangered Hawksbill and Green turtles	1981	4.5
Shungumbili Island Marine Reserve	Small island preservation and conservation of corals	2007	4.2
Nyororo Island Marine Reserve	Small island preservation and conservation of corals 	2007	21
Mbarakuni Island Marine Reserve	Small island preservation and conservation of corals	2007	3.8
Saadani National Park (marine)	Protection of marine turtles	2005	66
	Total Area Protected	2,209
Zanzibar MPAs
In the case of Zanzibar, to date a total of five (5) Marine Conservation Areas (MCAs) have been gazetted (UNEP-Nairobi Convention/WIOMSA, 2021b). A small area at Chumbe Island was earlier gazetted as a reef sanctuary and now lies within Menai Bay MCA. Revised general management plans (GMPs) were prepared in 2020 for the 5 MCAs; they reflect a co-management approach. 
In line with that, the GMPs provide for further zoning of MCAs into community management groups (CMGs), areas within which neighbouring communities largely share the same fishing grounds. Establishment of CMG areas is an ongoing process.  In addition, three areas of coastal mangrove have been designated as a Forestry Reserve, either individually or as part of a broader conservation area designation (Table 6 and Figure 14). The current network of MPAs in Zanzibar covers a total area of 2,282 km2.
Table 6: Marine conservation areas in Zanzibar. 
MARINE MANAGEMENT/CONSERVATION AREA	ESTABLISHED	AREA (km2)
Pemba Channel Conservation Area
(Managed by the Department of Marine Conservation)	2005	825.8
Menai Bay Conservation Area
(Managed by the Department of Marine Conservation)	1997	717.5
Mnemba Island Marine Conservation Area (MIMCA)
(Managed by the Department of Marine Conservation but includes a privately managed island within the MCA)	2002	337.3
Tumbatu Marine Conservation Area
(Managed by the Department of Marine Conservation)	2014	162.9
Changuu-Bawe Marine Conservation Area (CHABAMCA)
(Managed by the Department of Marine Conservation)	2014	118.2
Chumbe Island Coral Park/ Sanctuary (CHICOP) [ NOTE: While CHICOP is gazetted in its own right, it now forms part of the wider Menai Bay Conservation Area.]
(Leased to and managed by a private not-for-profit company under the administration of the Zanzibar Investment Promotion Agency)	1994	0.55
Total Area Protected	2,162.25


Figure 14: Marine protected areas in Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar
In the context of the URT’s territorial sea, this represents a total MPA coverage of 6,608 km2, approximately 15% of the area of internal waters and territorial sea combined, compared with the global target of 30%. It should be noted that there are no MPAs covering areas within the EEZ at this stage.
Policy & legal framework for marine biodiversity conservation - Mainland Tanzania
The Constitution of Tanzania provides that “Every person has the duty to protect the natural resources of the United Republic…”[ 	Constitution of Tanzania, Article 27(1).] Across the URT, there are, however, a range of policies and laws governing the conservation and management of marine and coastal ecosystems and resources. 
National Environmental Policy (2021)
The National Environmental Policy (2021) (NEP) is the principle policy guiding the protection and management of Mainland Tanzania’s environmental resources. The NEP serves as a national framework for planning and sustainable management of the environment in a coordinated, holistic and adaptive approach taking into consideration the prevailing and emerging environmental challenges as well as national and international development issues. The NEP promotes the mainstreaming of environmental issues at all levels, strengthening institutional governance and public participation in environmental management regime. The long-term vision of this policy is geared towards realization of environmental integrity, assurance of food security, poverty alleviation and increased contribution of the environmental resources to the national economy.
The NEP addresses eight major environmental threats, namely: Land degradation; deterioration of water sources; loss of wildlife habitats and biodiversity; deterioration of aquatic systems; deforestation; environmental pollution; climate change; and, safe use of modern biotechnology. In addition, the NEP addresses the following three cross-cutting themes: inadequate environmental governance at all levels; inadequate financial resources for environmental management; and inadequate gender consideration in environmental management.
A number of policy objectives are directly relevant to MSP and their achievement would be assisted with a comprehensive MSP framework. These include inter alia:
(1)	To strengthen coordination of environmental management in sectors at all levels;
(2)	To strengthen conservation of wildlife habitats and biodiversity; 
(3)	To enhance conservation of aquatic ecosystem for sustained ecological services and socioeconomic wellbeing; and
(4)	To promote good governance in environmental management at all levels.
National Environmental Master Plan for Strategic Intervention (2022-2032)
The overarching objective of the Master Plan is to guide strategic and coordinated environmental interventions at all levels, based on spatial variation of environmental challenges and intervention options. The plan is strongly aligned with the national development framework. The Master Plan will also be an instrumental tool in executing and operationalising the National Determined Contributions (NDC), and will therefore contribute to achievement of the National Climate Change Strategy (2021).
The Master Plan provides the status of environmental challenges and the interventions required to address these challenges effectively. In the context of MSP, chapter 8 deals exclusively with coastal and marine ecosystems and identifies the following two priority areas for action:
Mangrove areas of Northern zone, Central Zone and Southern Zone.
Corals located in Marine Parks of Mafia, Mnazi Bay and Ruvuma Estuary, Tanga Coelacanth and Dar es Salaam and Corals reefs areas located out of the Marine parks in Bagamoyo, Songosongo, Kilwa and Mtwara.
To address these priority areas, the Master Plan identifies a number of strategic interventions, including:
(i)Promotion of alternative livelihood activities in coastal communities;
(ii)Promote Marine Spatial plans (MSP) (including a target of developing and implementing localized Marine Spatial plans by 2032;
(iii)Enhance conservation and management of coral reefs; and
(iv)Reduce all forms of destructive fishing in a multifaceted approach.
National Integrated Coastal Environment Management Strategy (2003)
The National Integrated Coastal Environment Management Strategy (NICEMS) was established to support development of a national integrated coastal zone management (ICZM) program in Mainland Tanzania (TCMP, 1999). The goal of the strategy is to “implement the National Environment Policy and other related policies in conserving, protecting and developing the resources of Tanzania’s coast for use by present and future generations, to ensure food security and to support economic growth.”
The NICEMS is a cross-sectoral strategy, enacted in 2003, that seeks to give substance to the national vision for sustainable and integrated coastal management, by prescribing institutional arrangements needed for management of the coastal ecosystem, and identifies relevant stakeholders to support the process for implementing management and development activities. 
The stated objective and strategies contained in the NICEMS are highly relevant for MSP, which could provide a comprehensive tool for implementation of this strategy.
National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (2015)
The National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) is a requirement by the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) for the whole of the United Republic of Tanzania (including Zanzibar). It focuses on the protection of aquatic biodiversity, agro-biodiversity and terrestrial biodiversity. The overall vision which guides the NBSAP is to build a society that values all the biodiversity richness, using it sustainably and equitably, while taking the responsibility for actions that meet both the competing requirements of the present and the legitimate claims of the future generations. The NBSAP is designed to guide the development of sound management policies and help enable legal, regulatory, and institutional frameworks for rural communities and private sector to participate in biological resources utilization and combat illegal use of biological resources.
Wildlife Policy of Tanzania (2007)  
The main policy dealing with wildlife conservation is the Wildlife Policy of Tanzania (2007). The key objectives of the policy are protection and conservation of wildlife and wetlands, sustainable utilization of wildlife and wetlands, management and development of wildlife and wetlands resources, strengthening resource monitoring and research and enhancing communication, education and public awareness. The policy defines the government’s priorities in wildlife conservation through regulation of utilization of wildlife and wetland resources, monitoring of wildlife and wetland resources, strengthening human resource base and capacity building, developing infrastructure and modernizing equipment and enhancing international cooperation.
The policy advances protected areas as the most reliable approach to wildlife conservation and aims at increasing the number of protected areas. Moreover, the policy encourages community participation in wildlife conservation and also defines the roles of central and local government institutions in managing wildlife resources, as well as the roles of other stakeholders including the private sector and NGO’s. 
National Parks Policy (1994)
The National Policies for National Parks in Tanzania (1994) focuses on the establishment and management of national parks. The purpose of this policy is to preserve national parks and to ensure that national parks retain a high degree of integrity in wildlife conservation. The policy covers a wide range of issues related to national parks including park planning, natural resource management, cultural resource management, wilderness preservation and management, public information and education and benefit sharing. The policy spells out the government’s policy direction on use of parks, developments within national parks, tourism and concessions and law enforcement. 
National Climate Change Response Strategy 2021-2026
The National Climate Change Response Strategy (NCCRS) 2021-2026 was prepared in response to growing concerns of the negative impacts of climate change and climate variability on the country’s social, economic and physical environment. Preparation of this Strategy coincided well with the Tanzania Third Five Years National Development Plan, providing an opportunity of giving higher priority on climate change challenges and concerns in the national development agenda. It also sets precedence for the climate change agenda in the future five-year development plans.
The overall objective of this Strategy is to enhance overall national resilience to the potential adverse impacts of climate change and enable the country to pursue low emission development pathways to achieve sustainable development. The strategy includes a total of 11 specific objectives covering adaptation, mitigation and crosscutting strategies, that will enable the URT to benefit from the opportunities available to developing countries in their efforts to tackle climate change.
The Strategy recognises the impact of climate change of the URT’s blue economy and related sectors with evidence of major climate change related impacts in Tanzania include destruction of coral reefs, coastal erosion, submergence of small islands, destruction of coastal infrastructures and human settlement, intrusion of sea water into freshwater wells, and degradation of mangrove and coral reefs. Rising of temperature and rainfall anomalies will accelerate these impacts.
National Forest Policy (1998)
The aim of the Policy is to enhance the contribution of the forest sector to the sustainable development of Tanzania and the conservation and management of natural resources for the benefit of the present and future generations. The policy provides the foundation for Participatory Forest Management (PFM) and encourages the involvement of the communities and private sector in forest management through village land forest reserves, individual, group and community forests. The objectives of the Policy provide the opportunities for climate change adaptation and mitigation and how to address the challenges related to climate change and variability.
Environmental Management Act No. 2 of 2004
The Act provides the legal and institutional framework for the sustainable management of the environment in Mainland Tanzania. The stated objectives of the Act is to provide for and promote the enhancement, protection, conservation and management of the environment. The Act applies to Mainland Tanzania.
This Act outlines principles for management, impact and risk assessments, prevention and control of pollution, waste management, environmental quality standards, public participation, compliance and enforcement. It goes on to establish a basis for the implementation of international instruments on environment, as well as providing for the implementation of the NEP. The Act provides for the establishment of environmental units in all sectors and ministries as conduits of linkage and collaboration in spearheading rational utilization of environmental and natural resources and advocates for the continued existence of the National Environment Management Council.
The Act is highly relevant for MSP since it provides one of several legal bases for the designation, protection and management of ecologically sensitive areas (both onshore and offshore).
The Marine Parks and Reserves Act No. 2 of 1994
This Act provides for the establishment, management and monitoring of marine parks and reserves that will serve to protect, conserve and restore the species and genetic diversity of living and non-living marine resources as well as the ecosystem processes of marine coastal areas. The Act aims at protecting, conserving, and restoring species and genetic diversity of living and non-living marine resources and ecosystem processes of marine and coastal areas through management of marine and coastal areas so as to promote sustainable use of existing resources, and the recovery of areas and resources that have been overexploited or damaged. 
Both the Act and the subsidiary Marine Parks and Reserves (Declaration) Regulations, 1999 operate within the context of national environmental and fisheries policies for the protection of natural resources and the fisheries sector.
This Act and subsidiary regulations are considered to be highly relevant for the establishment of an MSP framework, since they provide for the establishment of protected areas and zoning plans. These are likely to be one of the critical spatial management tools in any future MSP framework.
National Parks Act No. 11 of 2003
This Act focusses on the management and protection of wildlife in national parks. The aim of the Act is to provide for the establishment, control and management of national parks.
The relevance of the Act is that it allows for the designation of marine parks and reserves (designated under the MPRA) as National Parks. To date, only one park has been established that includes a marine component, namely the Saadani National Park, established in 2005 north of Dar es Salaam. Saadani is especially important for protecting rapidly diminishing coastal forests, the Wami River estuary and mangrove environments, along with a marine component of offshore coral reefs and turtle nesting areas.
Wildlife Conservation Act No. 5 of 2009
This Act is the main wildlife conservation law in in Tanzania. The objectives of the Act are, inter alia, to protect and administer wildlife rich areas, protect and conserve wildlife resources and their habitats, promote the contribution of the wildlife sector to the sustainable development of Tanzania, enlarge the wildlife protected areas system and encourage community participation in wildlife conservation. The scope of application of the Act is limited to Mainland Tanzania.
The Forest Act No. 14 of 2002
This Act provides for the management of forests, undertaking environmental impact assessments for certain development projects; establishment of forest management plan for all types of forests for the purpose of its best endeavours to achieve sustainable management of the forest reserves over the periods of time; and designates Community Forest Reserves, Mangrove Forest Reserves and encourages community-based management. The Act governs protection, conservation, management and utilization of forests and forest products in Tanzania. The Act also defines restrictions and prohibitions relevant for forest reserves and reserved (threatened) trees.
From the perspective of MPAs that include areas of mangrove habitats, the tools under this Act may provide additional opportunities for protection and management of coastal habitats. 
Local Government (Urban Authorities) Act, No. 8 of 1982 
This Act provides for the establishment, composition and legislative powers of urban based government authorities in Tanzania. Section 55 (1) of the Act provides for the general duties of the urban authorities which include: to take and acquire the taking of measures for conservation of natural resources, prevention of soil erosion and prohibition or control of cultivation; collection of wastes, etc. 
Section 80 (1) of the Act provides that the urban authorities may, subject to the consent of the proper officers, make by-laws to be applicable in their areas. Some of the by-laws may be on environmental and natural resources management. In some areas this provision has been used to promulgate bylaws to manage marine resources.
The Local Government (District) Authorities Act, No. 7 of 1982
Local government at district, ward and village levels are being governed by the Local Government (District Authorities) Act, 1982. The Act contains extensive provisions relating to the establishment, composition, basic functions and legislative powers of district, township councils and village authorities. There are limited provision relating to fisheries management and protection in the Act.
The Local governments are also responsible for licensing artisanal fishing activities and enforcing fisheries by-laws. They are responsible for revenue collection and proposing biodiversity conservation areas for gazettement as protected areas. In addition, they are in charge of managing village and/or local government forest reserves. They are also involved in overall management of marine parks/reserves, mostly through the advisory committee set up by the Marine Parks and Reserves Unit (MPRU).
The Urban Planning (Planning Space Standards) Regulations, 2018
In many countries, setback areas or setback buffer zones are used as one of the coastal zone planning instruments. They are generally defined as areas or buffer zones along coastal zone where permanent development activities are not allowed or are restricted. In Tanzania, the setback area for different water bodies is specified in the Urban Planning Regulations of 2018. These regulations apply to all planning areas and have specified a setback line of 60 m from both sides of a river and from high water mark in a lake, sea and ocean.
Policy & legal framework for marine biodiversity conservation - Zanzibar
Zanzibar Environmental Policy (2013)
The main goal of the Policy is to bring together all sectors responsible for environmental protection, conservation, management in the islands for a long-term integrated approach in tackling environmental pollution and degradation of natural resources. It recognizes the essential links between sustainable development and sound environmental management and takes account of the special limitations of island ecosystems. In particular, the policy aims to guide economic activities in ways that will be sustainable and will not harm the environment in the long term. 
Concern for marine and coastal biodiversity features strongly in the policy. Section 4.4.6 of Chapter 4 promotes an integrated approach to ecosystem management, highlighting the need for integrating environmental concerns into development policies and plans, and the establishment and management of conservation and protected areas in both marine and terrestrial environments.
In this regard, the Policy identifies, as one of its key Strategies, the need to “institute mechanism of integration to effectively mitigate natural resource use conflicts.”
Zanzibar Forest Conservation and Management Policy (1996)
The overall environmental goal of The Forest Policy for Zanzibar (1996) is to protect and conserve forest resources including wildlife, flora and fauna and enhances the role of forest resources in maintaining soil and water conservation. Since conservation of mangrove forests is included within the provisions of this policy, it is therefore important to consider in the development of MSP as a mechanism for establishing, managing and linking spatial management tools. The policy also puts emphasis on the conservation and development of the forest resources for present and future generations, and on the need for comprehensive and perpetual tree planting as well as public education.
Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy (2022)
Broader provisions of the Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy (2022) are summarised in Section 4.4.2. above.  The Policy reflects a shift in focus away from the traditional sector-specific approach to managing marine resources and activities to a more integrated manner, that reflects the overall importance that the ocean plays in the socio-economic development of coastal and island nations. The Policy highlights that the islands of Zanzibar are blessed with a unique coastal and marine biodiversity and cultural richness and that Zanzibar’s Blue Economy development. Notwithstanding the 5 priority development areas at its centre, Zanzibar aims to exploit new ocean- based opportunities “while safeguarding and restoring marine ecosystems with reduced biodiversity loss, increased climate change adaptation, and low social risks”.
The Policy further identifies Sustainable Marine Ecosystems as one of its 13 guiding principles, towards which end “the biodiversity, productivity and integrity of sensitive coastal ecosystems will be promoted” as a key approach to blue economy development in Zanzibar.
Zanzibar Fisheries Policy (2022)
The policy stresses upon supporting artisanal fisheries, seaweed farming and other aquaculture businesses; value addition and strengthening value chains, community empowerment and micro-credit entrepreneurship, private sector investments and infrastructure e.g., fish ports, fish processing facilities, fish markets, etc. The policy also highlights on issues related to environmental conservation of the marine ecosystems such as coral reefs; and calls for an increased education and awareness programmes on marine conservation and implementation of the goals of the Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM).
Zanzibar Fisheries Masterplan (2022)
The goal of the Fisheries Masterplan is to bring together public and private institutions that are directly or indirectly concerned with the management of sustainable fisheries, aquaculture, coral reefs, marine conservation areas, etc. such as MoBEF, Zanzibar Planning Commission, academic research institutions, Zanzibar Maritime Authority, local government authority, tourism commission, environment, education, NGOs, and implement an integrated action plan on sustainable fisheries and aquaculture management and its implementation under environmental and sustainability safeguards.
Zanzibar Maritime Strategy for IMO Instrument (2019)
The objective of the Strategy is to accelerate adoption, incorporation, mainstreaming, implementation and enforcement of IMO instruments into the local maritime regulations (ZMS, 2019). The Strategy also enhances the level and capacity of maritime safety and security for the local shipping activities; and ensure compliance in the protection of marine environment and coastal zones.
Zanzibar Land Policy (2018)
The policy framework integrates environment into social and economic development policy framework while providing transparent and easy access to land for all under sustainable land use plans and Zanzibar Spatial Development Strategy. Coastal Setback Buffer Zones are set up and regulated under the Policy. The Policy stresses upon the protection of environment, cultural heritage and use of natural resources. Nevertheless, the Policy addresses the challenges of climate change and related consequences of natural disasters, food shortage, and recognize the trend of rapid urbanization as a major challenge to sustain future living and livelihoods (ZLUP, 2018).
Zanzibar Water Policy (2004)
The policy on water emphasizes the protection of catchment and watershed areas all over Zanzibar.  The policy advocates that development planning must take proper account on the management of water resources and the challenges of increasing salt water intrusion because of Sea Level Rise (ZWP, 2004).
Zanzibar Local Government Policy (2012)
The objective of the policy is to ensure that an establishment of an accountable local government that has a capacity to provide better and efficient basic services to the people and safeguard their livelihoods and ecosystem services (land, water, waste management, ocean, etc). The Policy promotes grounds for local good governance framework, provisions of local socio-economic programmes of the Government, security and protection, conflict resolution and ensuring the welfare of the local communities and sustainable development (ZLGAP, 2012).
Zanzibar Tourism Policy (1998).
The policy objectives are to develop, plan, manage and promote sustainable beach and marine oriented tourism industry that emphasizes on sustainability of exploitation of coastal and marine resources. Wastes risk damaging the pristine land and marine environment of the islands. The Tourism Policy addresses such challenges and promotes sustainability of tourism industry in Zanzibar (ZTP, 1998).
Zanzibar Investment Promotion Policy (1998).
The policy objectives are to mobilize investments that are socially and economically beneficial as well as environmentally sound in order to protect Zanzibar’s natural and cultural heritage. The Policy promotes and advocates for high quality tourism and ensures that investment in tourism attracts the type of tourism markets that are compatible with Zanzibar culture, tradition, coastal and marine environment and resource limitations (ZIPP, 1998).
Zanzibar Disaster Management Policy (2011).
The focus of this policy is to have safe and sound livelihoods with minimum disaster disruption to social and economic development issues. Thus, this policy aims to develop necessary capacity for coordination and collaboration for comprehensive disaster management programmes at all levels: Marine environment, coastal zone management, waste issues; or fire hazards, marine accidents, or weather storm could degrade the surrounding marine zones and affect livelihoods while harming coastal and marine biodiversity (ZDMP, 2011).  
Zanzibar Climate Change Strategy (2014).
The objectives of the Zanzibar Climate Change Strategy are to address economic, social and environmental risks and vulnerabilities caused by the impacts of climate change and formulate an action plan to adapt to those climate impacts. The Strategy is supported by the Climate Action Plan which addresses disaster reduction, tourism, low carbon development, waste management and marine environment. (ZCCS, 2014). 
Zanzibar Energy Policy (2019)
The rationale of the Energy Policy pertaining to ocean governance is related to  ensuring reliable and guaranteed energy supplies; develop and utilize existing and potential energy resources ;to incentivize energy conservation and increase energy efficiency; placing high priority on development and use of indigenous energy sources such as renewable energy and fossil fuel resources which is currently under exploration; and paying close attention to ecological and environmental issues during the development of energy projects (ZEP, 2019).
Zanzibar Integrated Solid Waste Management Strategy (2018).
The Strategy addresses the existing Solid Waste Management (SWM) situation, challenges and priorities in the Zanzibar archipelago that would lead to a cleaner and environmentally safer environment, for its inhabitants and the tourists visiting the islands.  At present the SWM situation in the Zanzibar archipelago, in both Unguja and Pemba Island is unsatisfactory. Solid waste is not being adequately collected and is littered or dumped in illegal/wild dump sites in the surrounding areas, including the tourist zone in prime coastal and marine domains. The strategy focuses also on integration of measures to prevent land based sources of pollution.
Zanzibar Oil and Gas Policy (2016)
The Policy vision is to ensure a sustainable, transparent, and an inclusive oil and gas industry contributing to strong socio-economic growth while preserving the pristine environment of Zanzibar. The policy mission is to provide guidance and enabling conditions for and effective, efficient, transparent, inclusive, sustainable and safe exploration, extraction and utilization of the petroleum resources towards the socio-economic development of the people of Zanzibar. The principal objective of the policy is to manage the upstream oil and gas subsector for sustainable development through broad participation and maximum value benefits with minimum negative impact on environment, safety and health.  One of the guiding principles is the protection of the environment and conservation of the coastal and marine biodiversity (ZOGP, 2016).
The Zanzibar Environmental Management Act No. 3 of 2015
Part XII of the Environmental Management Act (ZEMA, 2015) on Conservation of Biodiversity and Water Resources, contains provisions for joint declaration and management of coastal and marine protected areas between environment, fisheries and forestry for the protection of biodiversity and wildlife in Zanzibar. The Act also has provisions for preparing guidelines, strategies, programmes and measures for the conservation of marine and terrestrial biodiversity.  The Act establishes a mechanism for a Biodiversity inventory, determines species of conservation significance and prescribes measures for a sustainable utilization of the Biodiversity resources. Integrated Coastal Zone Management is also defined with Zanzibar archipelago being declared as the coastal zone. Provisions specific to combat marine dumping are included. 
The Zanzibar Environmental Management Act defines ‘Coastal Setback Buffer zone” as ‘coastal area whose width range from thirty meters to one hundred meters towards the land, measured from the high water mark depending on the nature of the respective coastal zones.’ The 30 m applies for coastal areas with a sea cliff and 100 m for gently sloping sandy beaches. This Act stipulates that no activities will be allowed in the coastal zone without the permission from the Zanzibar Environment Management Authority (ZEMA).
Fisheries Act No. 7 of 2010.
The Fisheries Act (ZFA, 2010) provides powers to prohibit, close, or limit marine activities affecting fishermen and fisheries. The provisions address marine pollution prevention and establish marine protected areas. In addition, the Act protects the established fish-landing sites across the isles and empowers the institution responsible for fisheries to maintain the preservation of those landing sites against encroachment or any attempt to forcefully resettle those sites. The Act empowers the responsible Minister to declare a conservation area in relation to all fish, fish products or aquatic flora. In practice, this provision has been employed to establish five Marine Conservation Areas (MCAs) covering approximately 65-70% of nearshore waters around Unguja and Pemba Islands. 
In practice the general management plans (GMPs) for the 5 MCAs established to date, all revised in 2022, explicitly define conservation-related goals and objectives, alongside sustainable use and management objectives. The respective GMPs also propose establishment of no-take zones within each MCA to support, inter alia, biodiversity conservation, protection of endangered species and fisheries replenishment. 
Zanzibar Marine Conservation Unit Regulations (2014)
The MCU (2014) Regulations’ main functions include to manage all marine controlled/conservation areas established under the Fisheries Act so as to conserve marine ecosystems and benefit local communities. The Regulations also promote, develop and monitor the proper management of marine controlled areas; build the capacity of the unit staff to carry out effective management of fishing, tourism and other related activities;  educate, coordinate and guide the proper utilization and sustainable use of marine resources to different stakeholders; and  promote public awareness on fisheries and management of tourism in the Marine Protected Areas.
The Marine Conservation Unit Regulations (2014) operationalise the Marine Conservation Unit established under the parent Act, and is the principal legal instrument for the establishment of marine conservation areas (MCA) under the Act.

Proposed new Marine Resources Conservation and Management Act, 2022 
At the time of preparing this report, a draft new Act was under preparation by the MoBEF to develop a dedicated act for marine protected areas. This Act will focus on conservation of protection of marine flora and fauna, critical habitats, mangroves, induing private sector blue economy financing in marine conservation areas, integrating conservation initiatives with the public and private sectors, and implementing multilateral environmental agreements on marine environment and biodiversity conservation.
Key draft provisions include:
•Establishment of a new Department for Marine Resources Conservation and Management within MoBEF, responsible for managing Marine Conservation Areas (MCAs), effectively upgrading the former Marine Conservation Unit (MCU) previously under the Dept of Fisheries.
•Minister has powers to declare MCAs in internal or territorial waters, in place of provision for establishment of ‘controlled areas’ in Fisheries Act, 2010 (see above). MCAs should be areas of importance for scenic nature, biodiversity, scientific or historical value, public enjoyment.
•Minister has powers to declare part of a MCA as a marine park, sanctuary or no-take zone within which fishing is entirely prohibited. 
Forest Resources Management and Conservation Act No. 10 of 1996 
The purpose of this Acts is to promote the protection, conservation and development of forest resources for the social, economic and environmental benefit of present and future generations of the people of Zanzibar. The Act defines forest resources to include: “(i) trees and other forest produce; (ii) the environmental benefits associated with trees and their living or in situ state; and (iii) all wild animals, wild plants, components of biodiversity and other living and non-living natural resources for which trees provide habitat, shelter or food or which are associated with forest ecosystems.” The Act consists of 101 sections divided into 13 Parts.
Certain provisions of the Act are applicable to the protection and community co-management of coastal mangrove ecosystems and are, therefore, included in this analysis. From the perspective of coastal MCAs that include areas of mangrove habitats the tools under this Act may provide additional opportunities for protection and management of coastal habitats. 
Sustainable Utilization of Non-Renewable Natural Resources Regulations, 2011
These regulations provide additional legal controls for activities in the coastal zone. According to the regulations, no person may “excavate, mine, extract, dredge, collect, harvest, transform, transport, lease and/or sell any non-renewable natural resource” without inter alia authorisation from the ZEMA. In addition, pursuant to regulation 6, the Regulations define a number of specific buffer zones from within which it is prohibited to “excavate, mine, extract, and/or dredge non-renewable natural resource”, including:
Within, and 1 km buffer zone from, any recognized forest protected area, and mangrove habitat; and
Within, and one km buffer zone from the beach. 
Zanzibar Maritime Authority Act (2009)
The Zanzibar Maritime Authority Act (ZMAA, 2009) Act regulates the powers of the Zanzibar Maritime Authority to regulate maritime activities and to ensure the prevention of marine sources of pollution and protection of the marine environment in alignment with the Maritime Transport Act.

Zanzibar Maritime Transport Act (2006)
The Zanzibar Maritime Transport Act (ZMTA, 2006)  deals with, among many functions, safety of life at sea, maritime security, prevention of marine pollution, liability and compensation, and other matters of relevance to all the conventions, guidelines and codes and standards of the International Maritime Organization ratified by the United Republic of Tanzania.
Zanzibar Tourism Act (2009)
The Zanzibar Tourism Act (ZTA, 2009) implements sustainable beach tourism policy and its masterplan. The Act also regulates sustainable use of the coastal and marine environment from tourism activities and promote cultural eco-tourism; preserve heritage and coordinate public-private partnership in Zanzibar tourism industry.
Local Government Authority Act (2014)
The Local Government Authority Act (ZLGA, 2014) regulates utilization of environmental services in a  community. Section 26 (1) of the Act specifies general functions of the local council which include maintenance of environmental sanitation, control of environmental pollution and preventing private nuisance, supervise and ensure measures to combat epidemic diseases; controlling extraction of stone, sand, wood, and other forms of natural resources, undertake afforestation and urban forestry initiatives, implement the land use plan, coastal zone management, climate change, disaster management, and population issues.
Town and Country Planning Decree (1955)
The Town and Country Planning Decree (TCPD, 1955) establishes a process for provision of orderly and progressive development of land in urban and rural areas including giving permission to develop such land, matters of land acquisition for development, planning, development control, preservation of historic buildings of special architectural or historic interests, land utilization, road planning, coastal zone planning, etc.
Occupational Safety and Health Act (2005)
The Act empowers the Occupational Safety Authority (OSHA-Z, 2005) to enter, inspect and examine any workplace for safety and health of workers related to any process in that workplace from physical environment, handling and storage, application of appliances and tools, use of explosive or highly inflammable materials, chemicals, or machinery, plant, or appliance and make sure that those facilities, equipment or materials are safety-compliant.  
Zanzibar Standards Act (2011)
The objective of the Zanzibar Standards Act (ZSTD, 2011) is to protect the consumer or the user from the risks and dangers of using a product  that may endanger health and safety of such consumers. The Act also ensures upholding of the quality of specifications of products, services and equipment. The Act is also meant to develop environmental standards for air, water and noise quality.
Zanzibar Public and Environmental Health Act No. 11 (2012)
The objective of the Public Health Act (ZPHEA, 2012) is to protect the public from health risks and hazards of unregulated housing and low sanitation standards. The Act also addresses prevention of public nuisance, prevention and control of infectious diseases, prevention and control of disease carrying vectors and vermin borne diseases, port health services, etc.
Zanzibar Disaster Management Act (2015)
Disaster Management Act (ZDMA, 2015) establishes the Disaster Management Commission which promotes and coordinates the implementation of the Disaster Management Policy. The Commission also implements all disaster management plans in Zanzibar including declaration of disaster situations, response measures and contingency matters including marine oil spill response plans, coastal and marine emergency, natural hazards such as floods, and climate impacts.
Development Control Unit Regulations (2015)
Section 9 of the DCU Regulations supervises the implementation of the Land Use Plan, and Local Planning Systems or any approved planning guidelines issued by the Town Planning Department or any other planning authority. It also supervises development in all designated areas, and any other key areas in Zanzibar including issuing a building permit. 
The Regulations also ensure that all building standards, building guidelines and procedures are properly adhered to as required by law or regulations. Also, the Regulations ensure that open spaces and public ways are administered as determined by the local Planning Sector or the Planning Guidelines issued by the Urban Planning Department or any other Planning Authority. 
Among other functions, the DCU facilitates the protection, preservation and management of historical, heritage and cultural sites, making the City of Zanzibar a hub of cultural development and an important centre of cultural expression in East Africa.
Institutional arrangements for marine biodiversity conservation
Numerous Government ministries and technical agencies have mandates touching on the environmental management and conservation of coastal and marine ecosystems and resources, as outlined in Table 7 below.
Table 7: Agencies involved in conservation and environmental management
MINISTRY	INSTITUTION	ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Office of the Vice President	Environment Division	•To coordinate issues relating to articulation and implementation of the National environmental policy and the EMA;
•To develop, coordinate and assess the implementation of strategies and plans to address the crossing cutting challenges related to environmental management and promote the integration of environment in other sector development frameworks;
•To advise the government on legislative and other measures for the management of the environment and/or the implementation of the relevant international agreements in the field of environment
•To oversee operations of the NEMC;
•To develop and issue reports on the State of Environment; and
•To coordinate the implementation of the green growth and climate resilient development agenda.
	National Environment Management Council	•To undertake environmental enforcement, compliance, review and monitor environmental impact statements, research and awareness raising.
Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism	Wildlife Division	•Responsible for the management of Game Reserves, Game Controlled Areas and all wildlife outside protected area boundaries and Wetlands. 
•Facilitates the establishment of Wildlife Management Areas.
•Creates awareness and disseminates information about wildlife management to the village communities in their village lands.
	Forestry and Beekeeping Division (FBD)	•Policy development and law enforcement.
•Human resources development. 
•Management of forestry and beekeeping training institutions.
•Monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation.
•Identification of research areas, prioritization and coordination of research undertaken by various institutions and organizations.
	Tanzania Forest Service (TFS)	•Management of national forest reserves including forest plantations, beekeeping reserves and apiaries. Includes management of all mangrove forests in Mainland Tanzania.
•Law enforcement.
•Rehabilitation of degraded areas.
•Provision of forest and beekeeping extension services.
•Management of forest and beekeeping resources in general lands.
Tanzania National Parks Authority (TANAPA)		The primary role of TANAPA  is conservation and to advise the minister on the establishment of reserves and parks, including marine parks. In addition, TANAPA is particularly charged with functions of:
•Protection of  natural resources, park facilities and tourists visiting the  parks.
•Park management  and development.
•Ecological and  wildlife health monitoring.
•Community  involvement in conservation efforts. 
Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries	Marine Parks and Reserves Unit	•To oversee management of marine parks and reserves operating under the auspices of MPRU.
•Policy development and implementation relating to MPAs and related facilities.
•Advise the responsible Minister on approval, revision and amendment of general management plans for any Marine Parks including other legislative matters pertaining to the conservation and management of coastal and marine resources.
First Vice President’s Office, Zanzibar 	Department of Environment	•To develop National Strategies and Guidelines of management of Environment.
•To coordinate the implementation of National strategies and Guidelines of management of environment.
•To prepare and manage implementation of strategic environmental assessment.
•To recommend environmental standards.
•To prepare and issue a report on the state of the environment for Zanzibar in every five years to be submitted to Minister.
•To coordinate implementation of the Environmental Policy.
•To coordinate all matters related to climate change adaptation, and mitigation measures.
•To coordinate and promote environmental research.
	Zanzibar Environmental Management Authority	•Enforcement and Compliance: Coordinates the implementation of the Zanzibar Environmental Management Act, manages the implementation of the regulations and ensures compliance with the standards, guidelines and orders relating to environmental conservation, prosecute and handles the cases related to environmental degradation and pollution, including those related to violation of the Zanzibar Environmental Management Act, 2015. 
•Environmental Planning and Monitoring: Conducts environmental monitoring that will help to develop better management and protection of environment, monitoring of biodiversity, marine and terrestrial  ecosystem, coastal zone management, natural resources and disposal of waste and wastewater, monitors and analyses the proposed areas for storage and disposal of waste and wastewater in partnership with other stakeholders, prepares guidelines and proposes the locations for destruction of unfit product. 
•Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA): Coordinates EIA procedures, issues environmental assessment certificates, building capacity to community, public and private institution on EIA, conduct monitoring to ensure compliance of conditions attached with EIA certificates are implemented, and keeping the records of registered EIA/Audit experts/firm eligible for conducting EIA in Zanzibar.
•Environmental Information and Communication:  Provides information to the community and other stakeholders regarding the implementation of roles and responsibilities of the ZEMA, receives and responds to environmental complaints, operates the Zanzibar Environmental Information Management system.
2nd Vice President’s Office	Disaster Management Commission	•To coordinate all matters related to implementation of  disaster risk preparedness, management, inventorization, modelling, recovery and resilience both on land and at sea.
•Implementation of the provisions of the Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act No. 1 of 2015 on disaster risk planning, reduction, response, rescue, recovery and management.
•Establishing appropriate Disaster Management policies, regulations, plans, strategies, and guidelines for ensuring timely and effective response to disaster.
•Overseeing application of disaster management plans during any period of natural disaster or emergencies and give orders or directives necessary for the plan to be implemented.
•Coordinating all disaster relief operations and preparedness measures.
•Ensuring mobilization and accountability in DRR and response measures.
•Ensuring compliance of the Act by all other Government institutions including the chain command from the national level to the Shehia level.
President’s Office (Finance & Planning) Zanzibar.	President’s Office (Finance & Planning) Zanzibar.	• Ensures macroeconomics stability for promotion of sustainable economic growth and development of Zanzibar through engagement of the Zanzibar Development Vision 2050, Zanzibar Development Strategy (ZADEP).
•ZPC is the highest economic development planning authority, supervising the implementation of such economic plans and provision of social services in Zanzibar. It is in charge of the Zanzibar’s development planning hierarchy, Chief Government’s Statistics.
President’s Office (Labour, Economy and Investments)	Zanzibar Investment Promotion Authority (ZIPA)	•Promotes and regulate foreign direct investments including ocean-related investments such as beach resorts, export zones industries, and  the small islets investment programs.
	Labour Commission	•Regulates occupational safety and especially in relation to Projects HSE aspects.
President’s Office (Regional Administration, Local Government and Special Departments)	Local Governments	•Promoting health, safety and environment, public health and environmental sanitation, maintenance of local health, construction, transportation, public markets, fish landing sites, schools, community centres, business centres, etc services and infrastructure. 
•Protection of local forests and biodiversity spots, water resources, heritage and cultural sites, disaster management and climate adaptation. 
	KMKM	•Enforcing maritime security and prevention of criminal and illegal activities offshore, management of marine resources and the protection and preservation of the marine environment. 
•Marine rescue support operations, disaster and humanitarian and aid to civil authorities.
Ministry of Works, Communications and Transportation	Zanzibar Maritime Authority	•Monitoring, regulating and coordinating activities in the maritime industry. 
•ZMA discharges flag state and port state responsibilities in line with IMO conventions, instruments and codes. 
•Regulates activities on shipping in the archipelago’s sea waterways to ensure safety of navigation. 
•As part of its safety and environmental responsibilities, it is tasked with investigating maritime casualties such as loss of lives resulting from overloading on boats, collision etc and take the appropriate actions. 
•In partnership with other public agencies and institutions, ZMA ensures the prevention of marine source of pollution and protection of the marine environment. It pursues the local implementation of Tanzania’s implementation of international maritime conventions such as IMO and ILO Conventions in collaboration with other stakeholders.
	Zanzibar Ports Corporation	•Planning, managing, building and operating Zanzibar seaports. 
•Regulating the use of ports and of the port facilities.
•Providing, maintaining, extending and enlarging port facilities as required for the efficient and proper operation of the ports.
•Maintaining and deepening the approaches to, and the navigable waters within and outside the limits of any port.
•Maintaining lighthouses and beacons and other navigational service and aids as necessary.
•Providing facilities for the transport, storage, warehousing, loading, unloading and sorting of goods passing through any port, and operate or provide access to road haulage service providers. 
Ministry of Health	Department of Preventive Services and Health Education	•Regulates Public Health issues including promotion of occupational health and sanitation  matters in blue economy sectors.
Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, Natural Resources & Livestock.	Department of Forestry and Natural Resources	•Protects, conserve and develop forest and natural resources for the social, economic and environmental benefit of present and future generations in Zanzibar. 
•To regulate conservation and management of Zanzibar’s national parks (e.g. Jozani & Chwaka Bay and Ngezi-Vumawimbi), forest reserves, community forest management areas (COFMA) and the special forest areas. 
•Conservation of flora and fauna and inventory of key species of ecological importance.
Ministry of Water, Energy and Minerals	Zanzibar Utility and Regulatory Authority (ZURA)	•Provision of regulatory and utility services for downstream energy supply and distribution.
	Department of Minerals	•Regulation of non-renewable natural resources including sand, fossil and coral stones, and marine dredge.
Ministry of Lands and Housing Settlements	Zanzibar Commission of Lands	•Implementation of all the provisions of the Land Tenure Act and its constituent amendments in Zanzibar.
•Implementation of the land policy, land use planning and land ownership process of registration throughout the country.
•Implementation of the integrated land use development and spatial planning with other Government policies.
•Developing an effective land information management system.
•Regulating all surveys and mapping in Zanzibar including marine spatial planning.
•Disseminating education and awareness on land use/land administration system in Zanzibar.
Ministry of Tourism and Heritage	Zanzibar Commission of Tourism	•Promote Zanzibar as a favourite beach and marine tourist destination while advocating for a sustainable tourism practices that addresses social and environmental aspects of the coastal and marine conservation. 
•Ensures the provision of quality services, better infrastructure criteria, safety and security of tourists and visitors in Zanzibar.
Ministry of Blue Economy and Fisheries, Zanzibar	Department of Blue Economy Development and Coordination.	•Responsible for coordination of the implementation of the Blue Economy Policy and Strategy of Zanzibar including marine spatial planning, blue economy investment and empowerment opportunities; multilateral environmental agreements related to maritime domain, regional and international fisheries agreements, maritime safety and security matters of Blue Economy.
	Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture Development	•The DoFD is responsible for ensuring the sustainability of fisheries and to increase economics of the community as well as the nation. 
•Regulates and manage the utilization of the fishery and aquaculture resources in Zanzibar. 
•To ensure the prevention of overfishing. 
•Fish landing sites are also regulated by the DoFD.
	Department of Marine Conservation	•Co-ordinates the management of marine conservation areas (MCAs). 
•Key marine ecosystems such as the coral reefs and marine fauna such as the marine mammals (whales, dolphins and dugongs), sea turtles, and other key species fall under the supervision of the DoFD.
• Some of the Marine Conservation Areas (MCAs) include Mnemba Island Marine Conservation Area (MIMCA), Menai Bay Marine Conservation Area (MBCA), Tumbatu Islet Marine Conservation Area (TUMCA) and the Pemba Channel Conservation Area (PECCA). 
•Chumbe Island Marine Park is a privately managed MPA that is co-managed along with the DoFD.
	Zanzibar Fisheries and Marine Resources Research Institute	•Established to carry out fisheries and marine scientific research for policy guidance towards sustainable fisheries, climate adaptation, and marine conservation. Also responsible for blue bioproducts quality assurance and certification for exports. 
	Zanzibar Fisheries Company	•Engages commercial and industrial fishing activities in the internal, territorial and exclusive economic zone waters and development and operations of fisheries infrastructure in Zanzibar.
	Zanzibar Petroleum Regulatory Authority (ZPRA)	•ZPRA was established in 2016 under Section 7(1) of the Zanzibar Oil and Gas Act No. 6 of 2016. It is empowered to regulate upstream oil and gas exploration and development operations in the Zanzibar archipelago.
	Zanzibar Petroleum Development Company	•It is empowered to conduct oil and gas exploration and development operations in the Zanzibar archipelago.
Ministry of Trade and Industrial Development	Zanzibar State Seaweed Company	•Engages commercial and industrial seaweed trade and processing activities and development and operations of seaweed processing industries in Zanzibar.

A number of protected areas are administered by multiple agencies (for example those protected areas designated under the respective Fisheries Acts  that also contain significant areas of mangrove). The overlap of jurisdiction and conservation functions between different agencies managing broadly the same areas has implications for the appropriate management of these areas which may either not be afforded appropriate protection or may be subject to conflicting protection regimes. In practice, such situations are generally addressed well enough through interagency collaboration but there might be some instances that call for legislative clarity.  
Role of local authorities in conservation of marine resources in Mainland Tanzania
Of particular interest in Mainland Tanzania’s institutional framework for conservation and protection of coastal and marine resources is the role of lower levels of government, which are recognised by the NEP as having an indispensable role in achieving its policy objectives. Institutions falling under the umbrella of LGAs include: district councils, township (municipal) authorities and village councils, the latter also including subsidiary village natural resources committees (VNRCs) and beach management units (BMUs).
Formally, under both the Local Government (District Authorities) Act No. 7 of 1982 and the Local Government (Urban Authorities) Act No. 8 of 1982, whilst LGAs are explicitly mandated to regulate the use of forest resources and animals and birds within their areas of jurisdiction,[  Local Government (District Authorities) Act (1982), Section 118 (2)n and (2)o.] there is no explicit mandate for protection of marine resources or fisheries. This is compounded by the fact that areas of jurisdiction of district councils on the coast generally extend to the mean low water mark and therefore most marine fisheries and other nearshore marine resources lie outside formal areas of jurisdiction of LGAs. This potentially constitutes a legislative gap to be remedied under future revisions to the respective Local Government Acts of 1982, especially in view of the fisheries management functions delegated to LGAs in practice. 
Spatial management tools for marine biodiversity conservation
The legal framework outlined above provides for the establishment of numerous types of spatial management tools, not all of which have been given effect to. These are summarised in Table 8 below.
Table 8: Summary of legal mechanisms to support spatial management and marine conservation
ACT	SPATIAL MANAGEMENT TOOL	PURPOSE
Mainland Tanzania/URT
Environmental Management Act No. 2 of 2004	Environmental Protected Area	For the designation and protection of any area of land which is ecologically fragile or sensitive.
Wildlife Conservation Act No. 5 of 2009	Wetland Reserve and Wetland Areas	Protection of areas of designated wetland.
	Species Management Area	For the protection of any animal or class of animal or their habitat.
Marine Parks and Reserves Act No. 2 of 1994	Marine Parks	Relatively large marine areas that are zoned and managed for multiple-uses.
	Marine Reserves	Smaller areas within which extraction of marine resource is prohibited.
Forest Act No. 14 of 2002	Forest Reserves	Areas of forest that are designated, zoned and managed according to the uses allowed.
National Parks Act No. 11 of 2003	National Parks	The protection and management of relatively large areas of land for non-extractive purposes.
Deep Sea Fishing Authority Act No. 5 of 2020	Designation of defined zones for of conservation and management measures in the Exclusive Economic Zone waters. 	To specify specific management measures to be applied to the fishery in any given area of the Exclusive Economic Zone which is jointly managed by Mainland and Zanzibar.
Zanzibar
Zanzibar Environmental Management Act No. 3 of 2015	Biodiversity Hotspots, Integrated Coastal Zone Management, Climate Change Adaptation, Protected Areas.	For the designation and protection of any area  of land, coastal and marine domain which is ecologically fragile or sensitive.
Fisheries Act No. 7 of 2010		
Marine Conservation Unit Regulations, 2010	Controlled Areas (Marine Conservation Areas)	Relatively large marine areas zoned and managed for multiple uses and to enable integration of communities in their decision making structures.
Forest Resources Management and Conservation Act No. 10 of 1996	Forest Reserves	Areas of forest that are designated, zoned and managed according to the uses allowed.
Oil and Gas (Upstream) Act No. 6 of 2016	Marine Conservation Areas and the Exclusive Economic Zone	For regulation of the strategic environmental assessment recommendations of the exploration and development activities pertaining to upstream oil and gas areas within Marine Conservation Areas and Exclusive Economic Zones.
Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act No. 1 of 2015	Natural Disasters and Human-induced marine accidents and oil spills	For regulation of the preparedness, readiness, rescue and recovery management pertaining to land and marine domain.
Zanzibar Maritime Authority Act No. 3 of 2009	Protection against maritime pollution.	For regulation of the implementation, mainstreaming and adoption of IMO related marine pollution prevention agreements and protocols.
Zanzibar Maritime Transport Act No. 5 of 2006	Protection against maritime pollution.	For regulation of the implementation, mainstreaming and adoption of IMO related marine pollution prevention agreements and protocols.
Zanzibar Ports Corporation Act	Protection against maritime pollution and development of ports and la ding infrastructure	For regulation of ports reception services, ports infrastructure and ports masterplan.
Zanzibar Shipping Corporation Act No. 3 of 2013	Shipping and ancillary services	For regulation of shipping and ancillary services including cruise ships tourism.
Local Government Authority Act No. 7 of 2014	Integrated Coastal Zone Management and Environmental Services	Coordinating implementation of Integrated Coastal Zone Management, social and Environmental Services for coastal communities.
Regional Administration Act No .8 of 2014	Integrated Coastal Zone Management and Environmental Services	Coordinating implementation of Integrated Coastal Zone Management, social and Environmental Services for coastal communities.
Zanzibar Tourism Act No. 6 of 2019	Marine Tourism Hotspots	Coordination in sustainable tourism in marine conservation areas and undersea heritage zones.
Draft Marine Conservation Act	Marine Conservation Areas, Reserves and Critical Habitats	For the protection of flora and fauna inside marine conservation areas and in the maritime domain.
Draft Zanzibar Fisheries and Marine Resources Research Act	Scientific Data for Marine Spatial Planning	Coordination of technical and Scientific studies for Marine Spatial Planning.
Zanzibar Investment Promotion Authority Act No. 14 of 2018	Investment in small islets eco-resort development.	Facilitating environmental protection in the proposed eco-resort development in the small islets.

4.6.1
Marine capture fisheries and aquaculture (Key BE Sector #2)
EEZ fisheries - Overview
The fisheries of the URT’s EEZ are managed collectively, by a single Government entity, on behalf of Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar. Section 1.5 of the National Fisheries Policy identifies “underexploited deep sea and EEZ fisheries resources” as one of several opportunities for the future development of the fisheries sector and states as one of 15 broad policy objectives “Promote investment in the deep sea waters.”
The URT’s EEZ is highly productive, but remains unreachable by local fishers. Instead, the majority of fishing in the EEZ is undertaken by foreign flagged vessels under licences from the Deep Sea Fishing Authority (DSFA). These vessels operate through a ‘private access agreement’ licensing system. The main value species in the EEZ are tropical tuna and tuna-like species that seasonally migrate into URT waters. Overall catches over the EEZ are dominated by three fish groups: the Yellowfin tuna, Bigeye tuna, and Swordfish. Other less common groups were the Black Marlin and Sharks and minor groups were the Skipjack and Sailfish (Shaghude et al. 2021).
The industrial fishery for tuna and other large pelagic species comprises purse seiners and long-liners, licensed by the DSFA. The number of licenses issued varies from year to year and season to season owing to the highly dynamic nature of the fishery and depends on variable migratory patterns. The number of licenses has been declining in recent years with 77 vessels being licensed in 2016, 53 in 2017 and 23 to date in 2018 (all of which are longlines).
Tuna catches in the URT EEZ are not fully reported, however total marine fisheries production has been reported to have remained fairly stable between 43 000 and 55 000 MT between 2000 and 2014. Owing to the lack of suitable port facilities to accommodate industrial fishing vessels within the URT, little fish is landed by the DWFN fleet in the URT (DSFA, 2019). As a result, and despite the high productivity of the area, the contribution of fishing in the EEZ to the GDP remains low, at about 2%.
As noted in section 4.2.2 above, the spatial distribution of the catch rates for the three groups of tuna differ between the fish groups as a result of oceanographic factors such as water temperature, productivity of the sea and the speed of water current and wind (Figure 9 above). As a result, yellowfin tuna are mostly caught in areas with warm water temperature and strong wind speed. Bigeye tuna catch rates are found in areas with warm water and weak water current speed while swordfish are caught in areas with warm water and weak wind speed that are associated with low productivity of the ocean (DSFA/IMS, 2021).
Coastal marine capture fisheries in Mainland Tanzania - Overview
Fisheries are important to Mainland Tanzania’s economy, providing income, export revenues and direct employment to more than 200,000 fishers and traders. More broadly, the livelihoods of over 4 million people (about 35% of rural employment) depend on fisheries sector value chains. Fish are also important to nutrition, providing about 30% of animal protein in the diet. Capture fisheries production in Mainland Tanzania of around 470,000 MT/year is mostly from Lake Victoria (57%) and Lake Tanganyika (15%) followed by coastal marine fisheries (13%) (Ministry of Livestock & Fisheries, 2019). 
Coastal fishing activity in Mainland Tanzania is concentrated in nearshore waters along the coast and around the islands of Mafia and Songosongo, with some artisanal fishers venturing further into territorial waters during Sept-March to target pelagic species. The principal small pelagic fishing grounds are fished at night by semi-industrial purse-seine vessels. This activity is concentrated over sheltered, moderately deep waters, mostly along the shores of Tanga region, off Dar es Salaam, in the Songosongo Archipelago and around Mtwara. Medium and large pelagic species are fished within 10 km of the coast by a local fleet mostly using large-mesh gill-nets.
A small number of industrial prawn trawlers are also licensed in nearshore waters, in fishing grounds associated with shallow, brackish and mangrove ecosystems, adjacent to major rivers and estuaries (namely Rufiji delta, Wami, Ruvu, Pangani and Ruvuma estuaries). The prawn fishery is predominately for export, trawling in less than 20 m, with catches of the white shrimp comprising almost 66% of landings, the bulk of white originates from the Rufiji Delta area.
Notwithstanding the overall growth in catches, recent reports suggest that the marine capture fishery is relatively static or even declining (Jeppesen and Richmond, 2016). Harmful fishing techniques have contributed to a general decline in the productivity of the fishery.  The institutional infrastructure required to monitor and regulate such activities has also been weakened. 
These challenges notwithstanding, reforms have been made to decentralized planning and management to the community level through Beach Management Units (BMUs) and Collaborative Fisheries Management Areas (CFMAs), which empower local fishers to monitor and become responsible for the resources and habitats they depend on (ASCLME, 2012a). Since 2007, CFMAs have been adopted and operationalised along most of the Mainland coast by the Ministry of Livestock & Fisheries (MLF) and local government authorities in coastal areas. 29 CFMAs have been, or are in process of being, established, covering 13 of 18 coastal Mainland districts and municipalities (Figure 15). 
15 of the 29 CFMAs already have management agreements approved by their respective district councils and the Director of Fisheries.  The main gaps are in Mkuranga District and southern Kilwa District (initiatives under way) and in Kinondoni, Ilala, Lindi and Mtwara Municipalities which have relatively small nearshore areas.
Defining the status of marine fisheries in Mainland Tanzania is hampered by a relative scarcity of reliable data, notwithstanding recent improvements to catch data systems. Nevertheless, indications are that artisanal marine landings already exceed maximum sustainable yields (MSY). Nearshore fisheries are characterised by increasing fishing effort, declining catch-per-unit-effort (CPUE) and unsustainable use of certain fishing nets, though significant efforts have been made to control illegal practices such as blast-fishing. 

Figure 15: Location of CFMAs across Mainland Tanzania. Source: Ministry of Livestock & Fisheries (MLF)

In EEZ fisheries, there remains a mismatch between reported empirical catch data (5-6,000 MT/yr) and estimates of potential production (100,000 MT/yr) that are driving national fleet development.  All in all, there remains an urgent need for management strategies that enhance the sustainable use and natural productivity of Mainland Tanzania’s marine fisheries.
Coastal marine capture fisheries in Zanzibar - Overview
The marine capture fishery in Zanzibar is largely artisanal and is reserved for citizens only, although foreign investment is permitted to support the establishment of largescale and deep-sea fishing businesses. Fishers generally use traditional fishing vessels and gear such as canoes, canoes with outriggers, sailing boats, with few planked outboard-engine boats. In 2020, Zanzibar’s fisheries sector contributed 4.9% to the GDP, based on direct fish value generation as well as exports (MoBEF, 2022). A total of 38,107 tons of fish worth approximately TZS 200 billion (US$ 89 million) were harvested in 2020. The artisanal and small-scale fishery sector in Zanzibar is estimated to support around 63,000 individuals directly, while the entire value chain of the fisheries sector employs 78,859 people (equivalent to 8.5% of Zanzibar’s total work force) (MoBEF, 2022). 
There are two principal focus areas in the finfish fishery of Zanzibar: the inshore demersal fishery and the pelagic fishery (both inshore and offshore). Almost 95% of fishing takes place near the islands within internal and territorial water. The main shallow demersal fishing grounds lie within the 10 m contour, calculated at about 6,720 km2 of which 4,000 km2 (59.5%) area around Unguja and 2,720 km2 (40.5%) are around Pemba. The principal small pelagic fishing grounds are fished by large semi-industrial scale purse seine netting vessels, involving light attraction at night. This activity is concentrated over sheltered, moderately deep waters, mostly on the western shores of Pemba and Unguja. 
Aquaculture - Overview
Mariculture is a growing sub-sector of the fisheries sector, with finfish (primarily milkfish), seaweed, sea cucumbers, mudcrab, prawns and pearl oysters being farmed at artisanal level in various places all along the Mainland coast. Industrial-scale mariculture is currently limited to a prawn farm in Mafia Island. In Zanzibar, the cultivation of seaweed, milkfish, sea cucumbers, crabs, and oysters  is practiced at artisanal scale and a national marine hatchery has been developed just outside Zanzibar town. 
The industry is dominated by small-scale farmers, especially women, producing fish for household consumption and domestic markets. With the support of the Mainland and Zanzibar governments, the industry has developed well in the last 20 years. The private-sector has also been established in the seaweed and prawn industries, while NGO’s and international organizations with expertise in mariculture continue to provide support. Many mariculture projects are, however, largely dependent on the knowledge and finance provided by international donor organizations, which has magnified the need for greater private-sector involvement and local capacity building in the sector (IFAD, 2020).
By far the most widespread  and high volume product farmed continues to be red algae seaweed for carrageenan production, with Eucheuma denticulatum (previously ‘E. spinosum’) accounting for more than 95% of production, supplemented with smaller volumes of higher value Kappaphycus alvarezii (previously ‘E. cottonii’). Both species are native to south-east Asia and were introduced to Tanzania in the mid 1980s (IFAD, 2020) (Figure 10). With a workforce of mostly women, the seaweed farming industry makes a significant contribution to the local economy and livelihoods, especially in some of the poorer coastal  communities in Unguja, Pemba, Tanga, Kilwa and Lindi. 
Marine aquaculture production in Tanzania in 2019/2020 included  11,407 MT of seaweed (8,967 MT Zanzibar; 2,440 MT Mainland); 97 MT of prawns (Mainland) and ~0.5 MT of sea cucumber (Zanzibar/Mainland)[  Sources: Office of Chief Statistician, Zanzibar; Ministry of Blue Economy & Fisheries; Ministry of Livestock & Fisheries.].

Policy & legal framework for marine capture fisheries and aquaculture - EEZ fisheries
Draft National Fisheries Policy for the EEZ, 2022
A new draft National Fisheries Policy for the Exclusive Economic Zone, together with an implementation strategy, was prepared during 2019-20. It underwent strategic environmental assessment in 2019 and the draft Policy currently with the respective ministries responsible for fisheries in Mainland and Zanzibar, and the Cabinet Secretariat, for final approval. Policy objectives include investment in new fishing port facilities in Tanzania to accommodate industrial offshore fishing vessels, with the aim of promoting value addition, processing, marketing and export of EEZ fisheries resources.
Deep Sea Fisheries Management and Development Act No. 5 of 2020
This Act establishes and provides for the constitution and administration of the Deep Sea Fishing Authority (DSFA) as a corporate body which has exclusive authority for the exploration, exploitation, conservation and management of fisheries. The Act applies to Mainland Tanzania as well as Tanzania Zanzibar for fishing activities in the Exclusive Economic Zone and other areas which the United Republic exercises jurisdiction rights or sovereign rights.
The Act is complementary to, and  to be read in conjunction with, the Territorial Sea and Exclusive Economic Zone Act (1989) for fishing purposes in the Exclusive Economic Zone and other areas which the United Republic exercises jurisdiction rights or sovereign rights, and shall for all fishing intents and purposes complement that Act.
The Act applies to:
(a)all fishing and related activities and any other activity or matter, and all persons, vessels and vehicles falling within the scope of this Act or any applicable international conservation and management measure;
(b)all persons and all vessels in, and in relation to areas beyond national jurisdiction:
(i)following hot pursuit initiated in waters under the jurisdiction of the United Republic and conducted in accordance with international law; or
(ii)as required pursuant to this Act or international conservation and management measures or permitted by international law or any international agreement; and
(c)all Tanzanian fishing vessels and persons on Tanzanian fishing vessels or dealing with or having any relevant relationship to them or persons associated with them, in and in relation to any areas within or beyond national jurisdiction in so far as this is not in conflict with the jurisdiction of another state.
Tuna Fisheries Management Plan (2022)
With support from the World Bank South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Governance Programme (SWIOFish) the DSFA has adopted the 10-year Tuna Fisheries Management Plan (TFMP).
The objective of this TFMP is to help achieve greater community and national economic benefit, while maintaining and/or restoring fish stocks at optimal productive levels as well as preserving related marine biological diversity. This management plan forms an adaptive framework that should be regularly reviewed and updated to incorporate findings from latest research and other sources in a timely manner to inform decision making.
This TFMP focuses on the main tuna and tuna-like species found in United Republic of Tanzania’s waters, the main bycatch species associated with these fisheries and other large migratory pelagic species commonly caught in Tanzanian waters. The management plan covers the artisanal fleet (net and line), the semi-industrial fleet (longline) and the industrial fisheries (variety of commercial gears, longline, pole and line or purse seine as the most common). The key management bodies responsible for implementation of the plan are the Deep Sea Fishing Authority, the Ministry of Blue Economy and Fisheries (Zanzibar) and the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries (Mainland).
Policy & legal framework for marine capture fisheries and aquaculture – Mainland Tanzania
National Fisheries Policy (2015)
The overall objective of this policy is to develop a robust, competitive and efficient fisheries sector that contributes to food security and nutrition, growth of the national economy and improvement of the wellbeing of fisheries stakeholders while conserving environment.
The policy recognises the significant opportunities that exist for investment in the industry, that can increase the contribution of the fisheries sector to the national economy and households’ food security, but also the challenges facing the industry. In this regard, the policy recognises that sustainable fisheries resources require effective resource management and control mechanisms, including spatial management tools, such as marine protected areas.
The Fisheries Sector Master Plan (2021/22 to 2036/37) guides implementation of the National Fisheries Policy, 2015 and provides a strategic framework for the long-term management and sustainable development of the sector. The FSMP outlines operational objectives and strategic interventions across eight thematic areas for capture fisheries (alongside nine others for aquaculture).
Fisheries Act No. 22 of 2003 and subsidiary regulations, and draft revised Fisheries Act
The Act provides for development and sustainable use of aquatic resources. It also ensures there is protection and conservation of aquatic genetic diversity, ecosystem integrity and endangered species. In addition, the Act advocates for the use of best available scientific information in fisheries development and sound utilization of the ecological capacity of aquatic areas; minimization of pollution; assessment of adverse environmental impacts; and restoration and recovery of depleted stocks.
The Act regulates fishing activities in both fresh and marine and restricts the issuance of fishing licenses in any conserved areas. Furthermore, the Act requires formation of community-based management units for the purpose of protecting and conserving fishery resources. Sound management and sustainable utilization of aquatic resources will ensure resilience of these resources to climate change.
The Act also provides for the creation of Beach management Units - groups of devoted stakeholders in a fishing community whose main function is management conservation and protection of fisheries resources in their locality in collaboration with the local government authority. One of the key functions of BMUs is to collaborate with other BMUs and village and district authorities on the joint management of collaborative fisheries management areas, conceived as a spatial tool for the co-management of fisheries resources.
The Act also provides for the development of the aquaculture sector and clearly recognises the potential spatial conflict between aquaculture and other marine activities. 
A draft revised Fisheries Act has been under preparation by MLF in recent years. The draft revised Act is currently pending a final round of public stakeholder review and final review and approval by the government, its proposed provisions were not available for review under this study. 
Subsidiary Regulations currently active under the Fisheries Act include:
Fisheries (Amendment) Regulations, 2009
Fisheries (Amendment) Regulations, 2020
Of relevance to MSP, the Fisheries (Amendment) Regulations, 2009 contain provisions for, inter alia:  (i) spatial restriction of certain fishing activities, including prawn trawling and foreign vessels, in nearshore and territorial waters; (ii) establishment of BMUs to support nearshore fisheries management; (iii) gaining approval for location of seaweed farms and large-scale aquaculture initiatives including cage culture in territorial waters.
Although the Fisheries Act does not explicitly provide for spatial management tools (since these are provided for under the Marine Parks and Reserves Act discussed above) the Act is nonetheless highly relevant to MSP due to the provisions relating to the establishment of BMUs and the highly devolved relationship between fisheries management and local authorities. In addition, the development of mariculture is a highly spatially defined activity which can result in conflicts with other marine users. Thus provisions within the Act for the control and management of aquaculture will be important in the implementation of MSP.
A draft revised Fisheries Act is under preparation by the Ministry of Livestock & Fisheries. At the time of preparation of this study the draft revised Act was pending a final round of public stakeholder review and government approvals. One legislative gaps to be addressed under the new Act is formalisation of collaborative fisheries management areas (CFMAs) as a key tool for spatial management of artisanal fisheries resources.
Fisheries Management Plans (Mainland)
The Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries has prepared a number of fishery-specific general management plans (GMP) as follows:
Prawn Fishery Management Plan (2012)
Management Plan for the Tanzanian Artisanal Fishery for Small and Medium Pelagic Fish Species (2013)
Octopus Fishery Management Plan (2012)
Each of these GMPs strategies relating to sustainable management of the fishery resource are identified thereby establishing a management framework for each of the fisheries. 
Policy & legal framework for marine capture fisheries and aquaculture – Zanzibar
Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy (2022)
The Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy (2022) provides a clear and dedicated policy statement for the management and sustainable utilisation of Zanzibar’s marine resources. Priority 1 of the policy places a specific focus on the fisheries sector (both capture fisheries and aquaculture) and identifies seven key areas for strategic intervention:
1)Enhancing sustainable fisheries
2)Transforming investments and capacity in deep-sea fishing
3)Value addition and post-harvest loss management
4)Fisheries and aquaculture resources management
5)Fisheries and aquaculture inputs and equipment
6)Ecosystem changes due to climate change
7)Research in fisheries and aquaculture
Zanzibar Fisheries Policy, 2022 
During 2022, a new  Zanzibar Fisheries Policy was prepared by the MoBEF and is in line with the Zanzibar Development Vision 2050, which aims to transform the Fisheries sector from a subsistence-based to a competitive, commercially oriented production system. It stimulates industrial, technological and scientific development aspiration towards “industrial value addition, including the commercialization of fisheries and aquaculture in line with domestic and export market demand.” 
The Policy also provides guidance to all actors in the Fisheries sector to increase fisheries incomes, reduce poverty, improve household food and nutrition security, create employment and stimulate overall economic growth, through appropriate investments across the entire commodity value chain from production, through processing to marketing, with the aim of easing constraints faced by the private sector. 

Zanzibar Fisheries Act No. 7 of 2010 & draft new Fisheries Act
This Act replaced the previous (1988) Act in order to establish better provisions related to the management and development of fisheries in the internal and territorial waters of Zanzibar. This Act applies to Zanzibar and applies specifically to capture fisheries. The Act provides the basis for the establishment of the Department of Fisheries, which has overall responsibility for the management of fishery resources in Zanzibar. The Act also established the Marine Conservation Unit (MCU) with responsibility for the coordination towards sustainable management of controlled areas established under the Act. The new Draft Fisheries Act is aimed at transforming the sector by focusing on both sustainable fisheries and aquaculture development, value addition, private sector participation, and attracting more foreign direct investments in the fisheries and aquaculture sectors in Zanzibar.
Fisheries Management Plans (Zanzibar)
The Ministry of Blue Economy and Fisheries has prepared a number of fishery-specific fisheries management plans (FMP) as follows:
Octopus Fisheries Management Plan (2019)
Reef Fisheries Management Plan (2019)
Small Pelagic Fisheries Management Plan (2019)
Each of these three FMPs were prepared under the World Bank SWIOFish project. Each plan has the same overarching  goal, i.e. to ensure biological, ecological and socio-economic development of the small pelagic fisheries sector as part of an adaptive framework that should be reviewed regularly to incorporate findings from latest research and other sources, and updated in a timely manner to inform decision-making. 
Key objectives underpinning each FMP have been identified through stakeholder consultation within the respective fisheries.
Proposed new Fisheries Act, 2022 
At the time of writing, a draft new Act was under preparation by the MoBEF and that the Act is aimed at transforming the fisheries and aquaculture sector by focusing on both sustainable and structural transformation of fisheries and aquaculture development, value addition, private sector participation, and attracting more foreign direct investments in the fisheries and aquaculture sectors in Zanzibar.
Proposed new Zanzibar Fisheries and Marine Resources Research Institute Act, 2022 
At the time of writing, a draft new Act was under preparation by the MoBEF. Key draft provisions of the Act relevant to MSP include the urge to address science-to-policy research on fisheries and marine resources research including the need to enhance national capacity to conserve, study and inventorize marine species and their critical habitats; developing national blue bioproducts quality and certification systems; establishing a sustained system of aquaculture breeding and production, etc. The Act also provides a window for ZAFIRI to enter into MSP development process through a detailed scientific assessment and data analysis.
Institutional arrangements for marine capture fisheries and aquaculture
A number of Government ministries and technical agencies in both Mainland and Zanzibar have mandates touching on the fisheries sector as outlined in Table 9 below.

Table 9: Agencies involved in spatial management and control of the fisheries sector
MINISTRY	INSTITUTION	ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES RELEVANT TO MSP
Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries	Fisheries Development Division	•To initiate and review fisheries policies, legislation, guidelines, standards and programmes.
•To enforce fisheries legislations.
•To strengthen collaboration with relevant Regional and International Institutions responsible for implementation of fisheries development, protocols and management conventions.
•To promote development of sustainable fisheries in natural waters.
•To monitor and evaluate Marine Parks and Reserves activities.
•To collaborate with stakeholders to conduct environment impact assessment for fisheries investment in the sector and monitor their implementation.
	Aquaculture Division	•Promote mariculture development in potential areas.
•Promote expansion of viable mariculture technologies appropriate for small, medium, and large scale.
•Collaborate and liaise with National, Regional, and International organizations involved in mariculture development.
•Initiate and implement FAO Code of Conduct for Responsible Aquaculture to provide guideline to address environmental and social issues.
•Prepare guidelines for aqua-farms, hatchery, and nursery management.
	Marine Parks and Reserves Unit	•A semi-autonomous unit governed by a Board of Trustees for Marine Parks & Reserves whose members are appointed by the Minister of Livestock & Fisheries.
•To oversee management of marine parks and reserves established under the MPR Act, 1994.Policy development and implementation relating to MPAs and related facilities.
•Advise the responsible Minister on approval, revision and amendment of general management plans for any Marine Parks including other legislative matters pertaining to the conservation and management of coastal and marine resources.
	Tanzania Fisheries Research Institute	•Facilitate implementation of fisheries and aquaculture research.
•Guide and regulate fisheries and aquaculture research activities conducted by local and foreign researchers including students.
•Strengthen linkages and collaborations among national, regional and international research organizations.
•Enhance institutional capacities for fisheries and aquaculture research in the country.
•Strengthen linkage between research, training and extension.
	Tanzania Fisheries Corporation (TAFICO)	•The Corporation is mandated to promote the fisheries sector in the country by undertaking large-scale commercial fishing projects in Territorial Waters, Exclusive Economic Zone, and High Seas. 
•The Corporation is also mandated to implement projects in Aquaculture and Fish processing. 
•From its projects, the Corporation will offer fish and fish products to domestic and international markets.
Deep Sea Fishing Authority		•Refer to section 4.4 above
Ministry of Blue Economy and Fisheries	Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture Development	•To promote, develop, control and monitor for the purpose of proper management of all fisheries and related activities in artisanal and semi-industries, including aquaculture.
•To build capacity for effective management of fishing and related activities.
•To encourage sustainable use of marine resources, quality control, value addition and marketing.
•To administer fisheries activities and all marine products from related industries.
•To carry out scientific research or other activities for proper management of fisheries related industry.
	Department of Marine Conservation	•To manage all controlled areas established under the Act in ways that will conserve marine ecosystem and benefit local communities and facilitate their active participation in the management.
•To promote, develop and monitor the proper management of controlled areas.
•To educate, coordinate and guide the proper utilization and sustainable use of marine resources to different stakeholders.
•To organize and facilitate management meetings with
•Stakeholders.
•To promote public awareness on fisheries and management of tourism in the Marine protected areas.
	Department of Blue Economy Development and Coordination.	•Responsible for coordination of the implementation of the Blue Economy Policy and Strategy of Zanzibar including marine spatial planning, blue economy investment and empowerment opportunities; multilateral environmental agreements related to maritime domain, regional and international fisheries agreements, maritime safety and security matters of Blue Economy.
	Zanzibar Fisheries and Marine Resources Research Institute	•Established to carry out fisheries and marine scientific research for policy guidance towards sustainable fisheries, climate adaptation, and marine conservation. Also responsible for blue bioproducts quality assurance and certification for exports. 
	Zanzibar Fisheries Company (ZAFICO)	•Engages commercial and industrial fishing activities in the internal, territorial and exclusive economic zone waters and development and operations of fisheries infrastructure in Zanzibar.
Ministry of Trade and Industrial Development	Zanzibar State Seaweed Company	•Engages commercial and industrial seaweed trade and processing activities and development and operations of seaweed processing industries in Zanzibar.

In Mainland Tanzania, with respect to MSP, the MPRU and the DSFA are particularly relevant as agencies with statutory responsibility for the designation of spatial management tools that can be used to determine the spatial management of certain activities. The Aquaculture Division is relevant from the perspective as stakeholder that may inform those aspects of MSP that are deemed relevant to the development of the mariculture sector in Mainland Tanzania. In terms of the provision and collection of marine spatial (environmental) data, both TAFIRI and the MPRU should be considered as critical stakeholders with capacity to undertake marine scientific research and monitoring that could inform the development of a future MSP framework.
In Zanzibar, the Ministry of Blue Economy and Fisheries has been mandated to carry out MSP process. Key institutions in terms of collection of marine spatial data include the Department of Blue Economy Development and Coordination, Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture, Department of Marine Conservation, Zanzibar Fisheries and Marine Resources Research Institute and Department of Policy Planning and Research, ZAFICO, Zanzibar Petroleum Regulatory Authority and Zanzibar Petroleum Development Company. Entities outside of the MoBEF include the Department of Environment, Disaster Management Commission, Zanzibar Maritime Authority, Zanzibar Ports Corporation, Zanzibar Shipping Corporation, Tanzania Meteorological Agency (Zanzibar Office); Zanzibar Environmental Management Authority; Zanzibar Tourism Commission, Zanzibar Investment Promotion Authority, Department of Forestry and Natural Resources, Office of the Chief Government’s Statistician, Zanzibar Planning Commission, and the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, etc.
Role of local authorities in conservation of marine resources in Mainland Tanzania
Notwithstanding the above, district and municipal authorities are legally mandated to execute key functions related to coastal and marine resources protection under other primary legislation. Most importantly, the Fisheries Act 2003 allows the Director of Fisheries to delegate fisheries licensing, inspection and enforcement functions to LGAs or to specific authorised officers at local authority level. In the context of conservation of marine resources, this delegation of fisheries management functions means that LGAs play a central role in overseeing the establishment and management of CFMAs, which can serve a conservation as well as a sustainable management function, in particular through inclusion of fisheries no-take areas in CFMA management plans (see section 5.3.3 below for more elaboration regarding CFMAs). In another example, the MPRA provides for LGAs to be represented on marine park advisory committees, giving them a formal, though limited, role in the   management of marine parks and reserves. 
Again notwithstanding the above, an important provision in the respective Local Government Acts of 1982 is the empowerment of district, township/municipal and village councils to make bylaws in their areas of jurisdiction. This is a key instrument in the conservation and protection of local environmental resources, widely employed in practice to advance conservation of local forest, wildlife, fisheries and other marine natural resources. Although nearshore marine resources mostly occur beyond LGA’s formal areas of jurisdiction, as defined under their respective gazettement notices,, the Fisheries (Amendment) Regulations (2009) do allow village councils and BMUs jointly to develop by-laws to control illegal fishing and environmental degradation within agreed areas of jurisdiction of a given BMU. Ideally this provision would also extend to LGAs to provide a legal basis for district-level bylaws supporting conservation of fisheries-related marine resources.
Role of local authorities in conservation of marine resources in Zanzibar
Sustainable management of coastal and marine natural resources is included both in the the Regional Administration Act No.7 of 2014 and Local Government Act No.8 of 2014. The role of LGAs is to ensure sustainable utilization of the local natural resources – terrestrial, coastal and marine – including integrated coastal zone management, climate change adaptation, environmental pollution prevention, waste management and biodiversity conservation, as well as safeguarding maritime safety and security (Zanzibar Coast Guard – the KMKM).  The President’s Office - (Regional Administration, Local Governments and Special Departments) or PO-RALG SD have a critical role to play in the MSP process.
Spatial management tools for marine capture fisheries and aquaculture - Mainland
Spatial management tools are not explicitly addressed in the Fisheries Act (2003). Instead, provisions for the establishment of fishery focussed spatial management tools are contained within the Marine Parks and Reserves Act.
An important provision in the Act, however, is the formal recognition of Beach Management Units. To promote local fisheries, the Act gives powers to the Director of Fisheries to enter into management agreements with BMUs. The minimum contents of the agreements are provided under the Act. Although not strictly spatial management tools, pursuant to section 18(10) of the Act, a BMU may be defined in respect of specific area/body of water. Thus, it appears that management activities that are the subject of a management agreement, may be spatially defined.
Spatial management tools for marine capture fisheries and aquaculture - Zanzibar
The relevant spatial management tools in Zanzibar are highlighted in Table 9 and are designed to enable the comprehensive integration of communities in their decision making structures (McLean et al. 2012). Moreover, the Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar has sought to promote the development of MCAs to ensure appropriate use of fisheries resources to preserve the integrity of sensitive coastal ecosystems and conserve marine biodiversity as well as to contribute to management efforts for inshore fisheries. Thus most MCAs in Zanzibar are partially protected areas that are managed with a focus on both fisheries and environmental management 
The establishment of these MCAs and their General Management Plans should form the fundamental basis for zoning under any future MSP framework. The fact that existing GMPs and institutional arrangements exist for each of the MCAs will provide a strong basis for expanding the concepts of stakeholder engagement, multi-use planning and zoning more broadly to the whole of Zanzibar’s maritime waters.
4.5.2.Ports and shipping (Key BE sector #3)
The URT, like most coastal States, relies heavily on ports and maritime transport to support economic activity. In addition to domestic use, coastal States such as URT provide an important exit and entry point for goods being transported from landlocked countries such as Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Malawi, Rwanda and Zambia. 
Maritime transport is under pressure to cope with current trade levels, requiring coastal States to accommodate a growing number of increasingly large vessels. According to the World Bank, favourable economic growth prospects for the East and Southern Africa region are likely to result in increased trade flows through coastal ports (World Bank, 2018b). This puts significant pressure on Tanzania’s port and transport infrastructure. Shipping also represents a significant pressure on the marine environment and other marine users and, as such, requires careful planning and coordination with other activities.
Shipping - Overview
International maritime traffic in the WIO region is relatively light compared with the most heavily trafficked regions of the world. Different vessel types follow dedicated routes and these are largely offshore from the coast. The major routes that are relevant to the URT transit from south Asia and the Persian Gulf, south/south-west around the Cape of Good Hope.
There are important coastal routes, mainly between the ports of Mombasa and Dar es Salaam that pass both inside (through the Pemba Channel) and outside the islands of Zanzibar. 
The URT does not appear to hold comprehensive data with which to map the precise movement of shipping that transit through the territorial sea and internal waters. Such data will be critical to understand the spatial extent and possible conflicts of shipping with other key sectors.
Ports - Overview 
Mainland Tanzania
Tanzania mainland has three major seaports, namely: a large international port of Dar es Salaam, and the two medium-sized coastal ports of Tanga and Mtwara. In 2020 a total of 1,457 port calls were made by ships to ports of Dar es Salaam, Tanga and Mtwara.
Dar es Salaam port is by far the largest, handling the main majority of the country’s international maritime trade and serving all major economic centres in the country as well as the transit countries. All major existing infrastructure corridors in Tanzania lead to Dar es Salaam, and it is the only place where both railway systems (TAZARA and TRC) join. The port currently handles over 13 million tons of cargo per year, equivalent to more than 90% of the total country’s import and export volumes. In addition to domestic use, coastal States such as URT provide an important exit and entry point for goods being transported from landlocked countries such as Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Malawi, Rwanda and Zambia. 
Mtwara port handles 0.2 million tons a year. It is an important port for the offshore oil and gas sector, as well as being well position to take advantage of growing trade activities in Mtwara, as a result of the new industry (AfDB, 2014).
The port of Dar Es Salam has shown a strong growth over the past years, especially in the container sector, but due to the resulting congestion in the port area, plans have been developed for a redevelopment and upgrading of the existing port facilities (Tanzania Ports Authority [TPA], 2022). As a result the TPA is implementing the Dar es Salaam Maritime Gateway Project (DMGP), aimed at increasing the capacity of the port of Dar es Salaam based on the currently experienced congestion in the port. The project involves among other things, dredging of the entrance channel and harbour basin; deepening of a number of the existing berths; land reclamation and construction of a new berths and hardstand areas; and, relocating the existing oil jetty.
In addition, the East Africa Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) project is currently constructing an oil pipeline to transport crude oil from Uganda’s Lake Albert oilfields to the port of Tanga. This will necessitate the construction of a new marine oil terminal and jetty at Chongoleani in Tanga bay. Oil will be exported via a 2 km long jetty to a tanker mooring facility. 
Zanzibar
The islands of Zanzibar are served by three commercial ports: the Malindi Port on Unguja Island, and the Mkoani and Wete Ports on Pemba Island, plus a minor port located in Mkokotoni (Unguja) (Figure 14). Given the island’s strategic location, the port at Malindi is one of the principal ports in East Africa and handles around 90% of Zanzibar’s trade. 
The port also services passenger ferries commuting between Dar es Salaam, Pemba and at times, Tanga, handling over 10,000 ferry passengers daily, including a large proportion of the tourism visits. From the ports to the consumers, road transportation infrastructure is responsible for delivery and movement on land. Harbours are thus integrally dependent on roads to move goods and people.
As the largest port in Zanzibar, the existing Malindi multipurpose port currently handles around 95% of Zanzibar’s cargo throughput. In terms  of  volume, the majority  of  the  goods  processed  through  the port are imports (approximately 90%). However, export cargo  has experienced  steady  growth  over  the  last  several  years which  is expected to continue. With approximately 3 million passengers per year (MoBEF, 2022), Malindi also has one of the busiest passenger terminals in the East African region. The port also supports an increasing number of international cruise ships. The  port  at  Pemba  is  significantly  smaller,  handling  less  than  100,000  tons  of general cargo per year.
Current traffic volumes at the Port of Malindi in terms of cargo and passengers  are  fairly  significant  considering  the  population  it  serves.  The port handles a range of cargos including liquid fuels, general and bulk cargos and containers. As a result, the port is severely congested, and cannot meet the growing trading target, which hinders the development of the Zanzibar economy. Due to congestion, ships must currently anchor at sea and wait for sometimes 5-6 days to offload cargo, leading to a loss of productivity and raising freight costs (Zanzibar Planning Commission, 2020).
As a result of the congestion, the Government  of  Zanzibar  has  determined  that development of a new port is necessary in order to accommodate future growth of cargo and  passenger  traffic. Current plans  envision  construction of a new multipurpose port on Unguja Island constructed in a phased approach.  The government’s vision also includes potential construction of a separate port to service oil and gas exploration activities  in  Zanzibar, as well as upgrading and/or construction of  new  port  facilities  on Pemba Island, and  re-development  of  the  current  port/harbour  area to  service ferries,  cruise liners  and other  passenger traffic.
In 2022, a Masterplan for Mangapwani Multipurpose Port and Related Facilities was launched. In addition to the existing studies cited from previous major reports on ports development, the Revised and Updated Masterplan contains information on topographic and bathymetric surveys, shipping traffic forecasts, structural and vessels design, terminal facilities and infrastructure, port equipment feasibility, and geological and geotechnical assessment.
Marine dredging - Overview
Capital and maintenance dredging is a core activity for ports, to ensure safety of navigation and that operational depths are maintained for access.  Dredging is undertaken under a permit issued by the National Environment Management Council (NEMC) in Mainland and the Zanzibar Environment Management Authority (ZEMA) in Zanzibar respectively. There are no designated offshore spoil-dumping sites in either Mainland or Zanzibar marine waters. Rather sites are identified and permitted on a case-by-case basis through ESIA and ESMP approval processes.
Given the port-related development projects variously proposed in Tanga (EACOP crude oil load-out facility), Bagamoyo (proposed fishing port), Dar es Salaam (proposed port expansion), Kilwa (proposed fishing port), Lindi (proposed LNG plant and export terminal) and Zanzibar (proposed relocation of port to Mwangapwani), it can be anticipated that large scale capital dredging programmes will be undertaken in the coming years. As such, it will be important to define a specific offshore area whereby material derived from port dredging can be disposed of and contained within.
Policy & legal framework for ports & shipping - Mainland Tanzania
A number of policy and legal instruments support the ports and shipping sectors in Mainland Tanzania.  
National Transport Policy (2003)
The Mainland Tanzania lacks an inclusive and principal maritime transport policy framework within which to manage its extensive maritime area and the associated resources and activities it supports. Maritime transport is given very brief attention in the National Transport Policy (2003), which recognises “the need for further restructuring of ports for increased infrastructure, safety, and Security and operations efficiency.”
The Tanzania Shipping Agencies Act No. 14 of 2017
The purpose of this Act is to provide for the establishment of a national maritime administration to regulate ports, shipping services, maritime environment, safety and security and related matters. The Act applies to matters of maritime administration, maritime environment, safety and security and maritime transport services at sea ports and inland waterways ports in Mainland Tanzania.
The Act establishes the statutory body known as the Tanzania Shipping Agencies Corporation (TASAC). In effect, this Act creates the statutory authority for a National Maritime Administration. Pursuant to section 30 of the Act, a Director General of the TASAC shall be appointed by the President of the URT. 
Merchant Shipping Act No. 21 of 2003
This Act primarily relates to the establishment of a national registry of ships and training standards for and welfare of seafarers. Part IV of the Act deals with the  procedures for ship registration. The Act applies to all Tanzanian ships and foreign flagged ships operating within, inter alia, the territorial sea under the jurisdiction of the URT. Broadly speaking, the Act gives effect to a range of international agreements established by the International Maritime Organization (IMO), and to which URT is a State Party. 
Though not specifically dealing with the spatial management of maritime transport, from the perspective of MSP, Parts VIII and IX are the most relevant since they deal with the safety of navigation/collision prevention and safety of life at sea respectively. Spatial management tools for the regulation of shipping are generally adopted internationally by the IMO. The Act provides the domestic legal basis for the implementation of ships routeing measures and the designation of ‘prohibited zones’. 
As a legal instrument for the establishment of spatial management tools for shipping, the Act is considered to be highly relevant for MSP.
Tanzania Ports Authority Act No. 17 of 2004
This Act establishes the Tanzania Ports Authority (TPA) and applies to all ports throughout Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar. Given the fact that regulation of ports within port limits is a statutory function of the TPA, this Act is highly relevant to MSP since any conflicts arising within port limits must be addressed, at least in part, under this Act. The ability of the Minister to regulate activities within the port is also highly relevant for MSP.
Policy & legal framework for ports & shipping - Zanzibar
Zanzibar has no dedicated maritime policy. Instead, maritime transport has been seen as part of the broader transport system and is addressed in the Zanzibar Transport Policy (2008). More recently, the issue of maritime transport and ports (in particular) has been included in the Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy (2020).
Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy (2022)
The recently released Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy (2022) now addresses maritime trade and infrastructure as one of the five key thematic areas. The Blue Economy Strategy specifies issues pertaining to enhancement of maritime trade, services, and infrastructure, including maritime safety and security while reducing negative impacts on social, economic and ecological processes necessary for human equity, diversity, and integrity of natural resources. Priorities are on enhancement of operational performance, shipping index, operational capacity, strategic investments and incentivization of ocean-based industrial sectors. These priorities run in conjunction with other policy priorities related to sustainable fisheries, aquaculture, climate change adaptation, conservation of marine biodiversity and the need to carry out marine spatial planning process.
Zanzibar Maritime Authority Act No. 3 of 2009
This Act provides the legal basis for the establishment of the Zanzibar Maritime Authority (ZMA), the legally and internationally recognised maritime authority for Zanzibar. The Authority is responsible for: (i) vessels registered and licensed in Zanzibar; (ii) ferry boats including pontoons; (iii) safety of fishing vessels; (iv) ships calling at any ports in Zanzibar; (v) ships transiting within Zanzibar; (vi) pleasure craft; (vii) offshore exploration rigs, production platforms and associated structures and crafts; and (viii) native vessels and small crafts.
The Authority has the responsibility for the designation and regulation of sea lanes within Zanzibar, for proposing particularly sensitive sea areas (PSSA) within Zanzibar, and to promote and ensure the safe use of ports and approaches thereto. These provisions provide the Authority with the statutory authority to designate some useful spatial management tools that could be useful in any future MSP framework.
Maritime Transport Act No. 5 of 2006
This Act provides for the registration of ships, safety and security of shipping and the protection of marine environment and matters related thereto. Pursuant to section 3(1) the Act applies to:
(a) 	Tanzania Zanzibar Registered ships wherever they may be;
(b) 	All other ships while in any port in Zanzibar or a place within Zanzibar.
Where the term ‘ship’ includes every description of vessel used in navigation.
The Act consists of 26 parts together with one schedule. The overarching purpose of the Act is to give effect to the various international legal instruments that have been adopted by the IMO, and that have been ratified by the URT. Therefore the Act addresses aspects such as: registration of ships; safety of life at sea; safety of navigation and collision prevention; protection of the marine environment; seafarer welfare; carriage of harmful and hazardous substances, and port and maritime security.
As noted above, the Act is administered by the Zanzibar Maritime Authority.
Given that the Act provides opportunities for the adoption of spatial management tools, to ensure the safety of navigation, this Act has potential relevance for future MSP activities.
Zanzibar Ports Corporation Act No. 1 of 1997
This Act provides the statutory basis for the establishment of the Zanzibar Ports Corporation (ZPC), a Body Corporate with overall responsibility for managing, operating and developing Zanzibar’s port facilities. It is in charge of five major ports in Unguja and Pemba Islands and all other  major recognized landings.
The functions, powers and duties of the ZPC largely relate to the commercial development and operation of ports, which is relevant for MSP especially on the implementation of the Zanzibar Ports Masterplan.  The ZPC also has authority for the designation of ‘harbours’ and the regulation of navigation safety within those designated harbours.
Given the critical importance of ports to maintaining trade flows, ensuring that conflicts do not arise that impact on the safe navigation routes in and out of the ports is essential for Zanzibar’s future development. As such, those provisions relating to the management of harbours are highly relevant for MSP.
Institutional arrangements for ports & shipping
Primary responsibility for the regulation of shipping rests with the Tanzania Shipping Agencies Corporation (TASAC) and the Zanzibar Maritime Authority (ZMA) respectively. The primary role of both agencies is the regulation of maritime administration, maritime environment, safety and security (Table 10). Both TASAC and ZMA are responsible for navigational safety within the port limits in Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar respectively. The operational aspects of shipping in the port limits (such as regulation of anchoring, regulating ships movements, pilotage etc.) are all undertaken by the relevant port authorities.
Table 10: Agencies involved in the regulation of the maritime sector
MINISTRY	INSTITUTION	ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES RELEVANT TO MSP
Ministry of Works and Transport	Tanzania Shipping Agencies Corporation	•Administer the Merchant Shipping Act (2003).
•Exercise port state control of all foreign ships and flag state control of ships registered in Mainland Tanzania.
•Regulate and approve marine services safety equipment’s and marine services providers.
•Regulate ferries.
•Coordinate maritime search and rescue operations.
•Regulate and coordinate the protection and preservation of marine environment.
	Tanzania Ports Authority	•To establish and coordinate system of harbours.
•To provide facilities relating to harbours and provide harbour services.
•With the approval of the Minister, to construct and operate new harbours.
•To construct, operate and maintain beacons and other aids to navigation.
Ministry of Infrastructure, Communications and Transportation	Zanzibar Maritime Authority	•Administer the Maritime Transport Act (2006).
•Exercise port state control of all foreign ships and flag state control of ships registered in Zanzibar.
•Regulate and approve marine services safety equipment’s and marine services providers.
•Regulate ferries.
•Coordinate maritime search and rescue operations.
•Regulate and coordinate the protection and preservation of marine environment.
	Zanzibar Ports Corporation	•To establish and coordinate system of harbours.
•To provide facilities relating to harbours and provide harbour services.
•With the approval of the Minister, to construct and operate new harbours.
•To construct, operate and maintain beacons and other aids to navigation.

Spatial management tools for ports & shipping
Table 11 provides a list of the main spatial management tools that are available under international law for the control and regulation of shipping. 
Table 11: Spatial management tools available for the regulation of shipping
SPATIAL MANAGEMENT TOOL	DESIGNATION TYPE
Anchoring Areas	Domestic – Gazette Order
Prohibited Zones	Domestic – Gazette Order 
Particularly Sensitive Sea Areas	IMO
Vessel Routeing Measures (See Annex D)	IMO under the SOLAS Convention
Safety Zones Around Vessels and Terminals	Domestic – Temporary through Notice to Mariners
Permanent through Gazette Order
No-Anchoring Grounds or Areas	IMO under the SOLAS Convention
Security Zones in Ports and Waterways	IMO – ISPS Code
4.5.3.Offshore petroleum exploration and production (Key BE Section #4)
Overview
The most recent US Geological Survey assessment of geologic provinces in the East Africa region, including the URT (Tanzania Mesozoic-Cenozoic Composite Petroleum System) estimates that the Tanzania Coastal province contains mean undiscovered, technically recoverable conventional resources as follows: 2,806 million barrels of oil, 67 trillion cubic feet (tcf) of gas, and 2,212 million barrels of natural gas liquids (Brownfield et al. 2012). More recent official estimates suggest the figure for gas is closer to 57 tcf (Henstridge, 2022) although the estimates of actually ‘recoverable’ gas reported by international oil companies exploring in the URT’s offshore waters are lower still, perhaps 36-40 tcf, with much of this located in deep offshore waters. Whatever the correct estimate, the URT is considered to have strong hydrocarbon potential and numerous companies are currently exploring for oil (Henstridge, 2022) (see Figure 16). 
The first discovery of natural gas in Mainland Tanzania was made in 1974 in the shallow coastal waters of Songo Songo island, Kilwa district. Eight years later, in 1982, the second discovery took place in Mnazi Bay area in Mtwara region. These are considered to be small reserves: Songo Songo has technically recoverable gas estimated at 0.7 tcf while Mnazi Bay holds just 0.3 tcf (Henstridge, 2022). Current natural gas production at Songo Songo reaching 70 mcf in 2008, and production at Mnazi Bay reaching 1 mcf in 2008.
Currently, the natural gas extracted is for domestic use rather than export. Since 2004, the gas from the Songo Songo gas field has been piped 232 km to generate electricity in Dar es Salaam, at the Ubungo Power Station. By 2007, the gas from the Mnazi Bay gas field was used to produce electricity in Mtwara and in Lindi by 2009. A 500 km gas pipeline has also been constructed to supply surplus gas from Mnazi Bay (and expected new discoveries) to Dar es Salaam. The use of onshore and shallow water gas in power generation has supported a significant addition to Tanzania’s generating capacity, with scope for further increases in line with the ambition for more investment in gas-fired power generation.
Significant gas discoveries have also been made in deep offshore waters. These reserves are located 80–100 kilometres offshore, in water depths of up to 2,000 m and a further 4,000 m below the seabed. Estimates place the size of these reserves at 29–37 tcf, assessed as being sufficient to justify investment in the construction of a Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) plant at Lindi.
The Government of Zanzibar has also recognised the need to support the use of oil and gas resources to meet local energy demand, with any surplus to be exported in the region and overseas. The exploration and production of oil and gas is also an area of focus within the scope of Zanzibar’s blue economy and is a priority area under the recently revised Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy (MoBEF, 2022). 

Figure 16: Location of onshore and offshore petroleum blocks and well sites. Source: Petroleum Upstream Regulatory Authority (PURA) (2022).
Policy & legal framework for offshore petroleum exploration & production - URT
Offshore oil and gas exploration and production in the URT is governed by various energy sector policies and legislation, as outlined below.
National Energy Policy (2015)
The Government has not adopted a separate policy framework for the oil and gas sector. Instead, policy direction for this sector is contained within section 3.2 of the National Energy Policy. In this regard, the policy identifies the following policy objectives with respect to upstream oil and gas operations:
(i) 	Optimizing and effectively managing petroleum resource base; and
(iii) 	Ensuring timely announcement and optimal development of petroleum commercial discoveries.
The overarching policy framework relating to offshore energy is the National Energy Policy (2015), prepared by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. The policy aims at sustainably providing adequate, reliable and affordable energy to the Tanzanians. The policy was formulated to, among other things, unlock the bottlenecks in the energy sector and to increase the share of renewable energies in electricity generation.
The policy recognises both offshore petroleum and renewable energy as critical components of the URT’s overall energy portfolio. 
The petroleum sub-sector in Tanzania is governed by the following key instruments, which lay the foundations for strong governance of the sector: (i) The Petroleum Act (2015); (ii) Zanzibar Oil and Gas (Upstream) Act No. 6 of 2016; (iii) The Oil and Gas Revenues Management Act (2015); (iv) and The Tanzania Extractive Industries (Transparency and Accountability) Act (2014). Of these, the Petroleum Act (2015) and the Zanzibar Oil and Gas (Upstream) Act No. 6 of 2016  are the most relevant to the regulation of maritime space and MSP.
Petroleum Act No. 21 of 2015
The Petroleum Act’s stated aim is “to provide for regulation of upstream, midstream and downstream Petroleum Activities, establishment of the Petroleum Upstream Regulatory Authority, to provide for the National Oil Company, to secure the accountability of petroleum entities and to provide for other related matters.” It is thus quite a broad-ranging act, and constitutes the bulk of the legal architecture for how the upstream petroleum sector will function.
Oil and gas resources is vested in the public and exclusively managed by the government in trust for the people of Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar. Private ownership of oil and gas rights is not allowed, although private individuals may be granted rights for exploration or development. As such, the government plays a significant role in the oil and gas industry in URT.
The Act includes several provisions designed to protect worker safety and the environment. In doing so, it supports other pieces of legislation such as the Environmental Management Act (2003) and the Occupational Health and Safety Act (2003). 
Zanzibar Oil and Gas (Upstream) Act No. 6 of 2016
The primary purpose of the Act is to provide for the establishment of two key institutions, namely the Zanzibar Petroleum (Upstream) Regulatory Authority (ZPRA) and the Zanzibar Petroleum Development Company (ZPDC). These key institutions provide the regulatory authority and the operational capability to develop the offshore oil and gas sector respectively. As such, Part III of the Act exclusively deals with the establishment and operation of these two entities.
The Act provides for the issuance of different types of permit or licence, including reconnaissance permits exploration licences, development licenses and production permits on the basis of fulfilment of various technical, commercial, health, safety and environment requirements including Strategic Environmental Assessment and Environmental and Social Impact Assessment.
Policy & legal framework for offshore petroleum exploration & production - Zanzibar 
Zanzibar Development Vision (2050)
The Zanzibar Development Vision (2050) is the overall framework guiding all development plans and policies for eradicating poverty.
Pillar III of the Vision (Infrastructural Linkages) is particularly relevant since it deals with energy (as well as telecommunications networks). The Vision addresses both energy security and the development of the oil and gas sector's policy on sustainable provision of energy is to ensure adequate, environmentally sound, alternative and sustained energy supplies for easing socio-economic development.
In this regard, section 3.5 of the Vision lists among the development aspirations:
Sustainable and diversified energy sources through the exploration and adoption of domestically generated energy, including potential renewable energy and non-renewable energy sources; and
A reliable power system backed by improvements to the current submarine cable network.
Zanzibar Energy Policy (2009)
Overall energy policy is governed by the Zanzibar Energy Policy (2009). Section 7.0 of the policy identifies “Exploring and increasing the use of indigenous sources for energy supply” as one of the key focus areas of the policy. In the specific context of MSP, two key policy issues highlighted under section 7.0 are particularly relevant:
(1)	Exploration of potential fossil fuel reserves, whereby Zanzibar shall actively promote and support exploration, up-stream production and supply of gas and petroleum products; and
(2)	Indigenous renewable sources of energy, whereby Zanzibar recognises the potential for solar and wind power based electricity generation and will investigate suitable locations, and develop clear directions for exploration, public-private joint ventures, possibilities for connection to the grid. 
Zanzibar Oil and Gas (Upstream) Policy (2016)
The Zanzibar Energy Policy has been complemented by the Zanzibar Oil and Gas (Upstream) Policy (2016) in addressing specific complexities of the oil and gas industry. The principal objective of the policy is “to manage the upstream oil and gas subsector for sustainable development through broad participation and maximum value benefits with minimum negative impact on environment, safety and health.”
The policy focuses on good management of oil and gas resources from exploration, through development to the decommissioning. The policy places an emphasis on good governance, creating lasting benefits to Zanzibaris, conserving environment with attention on safety and health.
Section 2.16 of the policy recognises the need for integrated planning of the oil and gas sector with other sectors, and in particular, recognises the potential conflict that may occur with the fisheries sector. In this regard the policy explicitly recognises the importance of MSP as a tool for the allocation of space and resolution of conflict over the use of the marine zones, including the allocation of deep sea fishing licenses for international fisheries vessels.
Institutional arrangements for offshore petroleum exploration & production
Both Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar have established a regulatory regime consisting of an upstream regulator and a national oil company as summarised in Table 12 below.


Table 12: Agencies involved in the regulation of upstream oil and gas activities 
MINISTRY	INSTITUTION	ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES RELEVANT TO MSP
Ministry of Energy	Petroleum and Gas Division	•To develop policies, plans and programs related to petroleum and natural gas resources to ensure efficient, cost effective, reliable and quality services in an environmentally friendly manner.
•To promote sustainable development and exploitation of the petroleum resources.
•To coordinate the development of petroleum and natural gas infrastructure for security of supply.
•To oversee granting, renewing, suspending and cancelling of petroleum exploration and development licenses.
•To conduct research and studies on petroleum resources and promote efficiency and sustainable use of petroleum resource.
	Petroleum Upstream Regulatory Authority	•Advising the Government on proposed development plans, infrastructure development, tail end plan and decommissioning of installations submitted by a license holder.
•Conducting or cause to be conducted reconnaissance surveys and evaluating prospectivity of frontier areas.
•Receiving and processing application for granting, renewing, suspending and cancelling of petroleum exploration license, development license and production permit.
•Coordinating and cooperating with other Government institutions, including other regulatory authorities responsible for monitoring, evaluation and review of petroleum operations.
•Monitoring all phases of petroleum discovery, evaluation and delineation, commercial evaluation of discovery, reservoir performance and production to ensure optimal rates for the discovery, commercialization and recovery of petroleum resources using the best available technologies and field practices.
•Maintaining continued communication and dialogue with all stakeholders in the industry including the public to ensure optimal development of the sector.
•Facilitating resolution of complaints and disputes.
•Making rules and guidelines on the conduct of petroleum operations and other related matters. 
	Tanzania Petroleum Development Corporation	•Participating in petroleum reconnaissance, exploration and development projects.
•Carrying out specialized operations in the petroleum value chain using subsidiary companies.
•Handling the Government’s commercial participating interests in the petroleum sub-sector.
•Investigating and proposing new upstream, midstream and downstream ventures locally and internationally.
•Contracting, holding equity or participating in oil service and supply chain franchises and other licenses.
•Performing any petroleum activities and related functions.
Ministry of Blue Economy and Fisheries	Zanzibar Petroleum Regulatory Authority	•Monitor and regulate exploration, development and production of petroleum in Zanzibar.
•Advice the Minister responsible for petroleum affairs on the granting, renewing, suspending and cancelling of petroleum exploration licence, development licence and production permit.
•Provide information to the relevant Authority for the collection of royalty, cost oil/gas, profit oil/gas, taxes and fees from petroleum activities.
•Advising the Government on proposed development plans, infrastructure development, tail end plan and decommissioning of installations submitted by Zanzibar Petroleum Development Company (ZPDC) and Contractors.
•Administer compliance of Zanzibar Laws and Petroleum agreements by all stakeholders.
•Ensure the establishment of a central database of persons involved in petroleum activities, manage petroleum data and provide periodic updates and publication of the status of petroleum activities. 
	Zanzibar Petroleum Development Company	•Participating in petroleum reconnaissance, exploration and development projects.
•Carrying out specialized operations in the petroleum value chain using subsidiary companies.
•Handling the Government’s commercial participating interests in the petroleum sub-sector.
•Investigating and proposing new upstream, midstream and downstream ventures locally and internationally.
•Contracting, holding equity or participating in oil service and supply chain franchises and other licenses.
•Performing any petroleum activities and related functions.

Spatial management tools
In addition to the delineation of licence blocks which are, by definition, spatial in nature, a number of spatial management tools are available to aid with the safe operation of the offshore petroleum sector (Table 13). 
Table 13: Spatial management tools available to the upstream oil and gas sector
SPATIAL MANAGEMENT TOOL
Oil & Gas Lease or Concession Areas
Areas Withdrawn from Leasing
Safety Zones Around Offshore Installations
Pipeline Rights-of-Way or Protection Corridors
4.5.4.Subsea cables (Key BE Sector #5)
Subsea power transmission and telecommunication cables are considered as critical infrastructure for the URT. As such, they are an essential element to be included under any future MSP initiative.
Telecommunication cables - Overview
The past few years has seen a proliferation of submarine telecommunications cables servicing the WIO region and growing demand for internet services is spurring large-scale construction of both surface and under-sea cables in Africa as technology companies pump in more investments funds to replace old lines and put up new ones. Submarine cables are landed onshore while the cable itself is laid on the seafloor. The cable traversing the intertidal zone is generally buried before connecting to land-based telecommunications networks. There are potential environmental concerns relating to the deployment of the cable, as well as the presence of the cable within the ecosystem it traverses.
A number of such cables traverse the URT’s EEZ and make landfall in Dar es Salaam (Figure 17). There are also a number of cables running between Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar. There is, therefore, a need to take these into account when considering multi-use marine planning.
The URT is constructing the National Fibre Optic Cable network named as National ICT Broadband Backbone (NICTBB) with a view to achieve its ICT vision. This is managed and operated by the Tanzania Telecommunications Corporation (TTCL Corporation) on behalf of the government, through the Ministry of Information, Communication and Information Technology (MICIT). 

Figure 17: Submarine cables and pipelines landing in Mainland Tanzania (Dar es Salaam)[ 	Source: https://www.submarinecablemap.com/]
Policy & legal framework for subsea communication cables - URT
National Information and Communications Technology Policy (2016)
This policy formulated within the context of national vision statements guided by the Tanzania Development Vision 2025, which recognizes that ICT is central to a competitive social and economic transformation. The overall objective of the policy is to accelerate socio-economic development with potentials to transform Tanzania into ICT driven middle-income economy and society.
Policy Objective 3.2.2.1 addresses the issue of infrastructure development and recognises the importance of continuing to develop and support the existing ICT infrastructure including: (i) develop the infrastructure beyond the current reach of more than 7,560 km of fibre; and (ii) participation of private sector in metro fibre investment through operators’ consortium and roll out of telecommunication infrastructure countrywide. 
According to the Policy Statement, the Government shall inter alia:-
i) Ensure conducive environment for collaboration of public and private sector in exploring various means of financing ICT infrastructure;
ii) Ensure safe and reliable ICT infrastructure developed countrywide; and
iv) Ensure availability of supportive framework to guide deployment of ICT infrastructure including right of way and sharing of such infrastructure.
The Electronic and Postal Communications Act No. 3 of 2010
The purpose of this Act is to make provisions for the enactment of electronic and postal communications law with a view to keeping abreast with developments in the electronic communications industry. The Act establishes a comprehensive regulatory regime for electronic communications service providers. The Act applies to Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar.
The Act provides for the continuation of the Converged Licensing Framework (CLF), as a key strategy to implement liberalisation. The CLF provides for a number of different types of licences including a Network Facility License which provides authorisation for ownership and control of any element, or combination of elements, of physical infrastructure used principally for, or in connection with, the provision of one or more network services. This includes, inter alia, submarine cable landing centres. 
The Act is, however, silent on the regulation of subsea cables generally.
Institutional arrangements for subsea communication cables
The Tanzania Communications Regulatory Authority (TCRA) is the primary agency with responsibility for the regulation of Postal, Broadcasting and Electronic Communications sectors. Operators are responsible for building and maintaining info-communication infrastructure.
Spatial management tools for subsea communication cables
No spatial management tools have been identified with respect to the protection of subsea telecommunication cables.
Power cables - Overview
The key issue with respect to subsea power cables is the provision of electrical power to the islands of Unguja and Pemba since, although historically both Unguja and Pemba had on-island power generation infrastructure, today Zanzibar does not generate any native energy. Instead, both islands are connected via submarine cable connections to the national power grid with electricity transmitted and supplied by a sole utility agent - Zanzibar Electricity Corporation (ZECO). The main power cable for Unguja consists of a 132 kV, 37 km length cable laid across between Ras Kiromoni (Mainland) and Fumba on Unguja. The cable is laid in a maximum water depth of 60 m. As such, Unguja is fully dependent on the supply of electricity from Mainland Tanzania.
As Zanzibar’s economy develops, the demand for electricity is expected to grow. Though energy security is currently satisfactory with a total electricity surplus of 20 MW in 2020, there are concerns that power supply may soon become unpredictable and struggle to keep up with rising energy demands. 
Policy & legal framework for subsea power cables - URT
The National Energy Policy (2015)
The main objective of this policy is to provide guidance for sustainable development and utilization of energy resources to ensure optimal benefits to Tanzanians and contribute towards transformation of the national economy.
The policy address inter alia, electricity generation, transmission, distribution, interconnection, power trading and rural electrification.
The Electricity Act No. 2 of 2008
The purpose of this Act to provide for the facilitation and regulation of generation, transmission, transformation, distribution, supply and use of electric energy, to provide for cross-border trade in electricity and the planning and regulation of rural electrification.
Under the Act, operators wishing to undertake power transmission and distribution activities must be licenced by the Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory Authority. While the Act does provide access rights to licensees across land (for the purpose of operating, repairing or maintaining its facilities) and also for the establishment of a wayleave to a Licensee around energy facilities, the Act is silent on the matter of subsea cables. Broadly speaking the definition of land includes the seabed so it may be interpreted that these provisions apply to subsea cables. However, this would require clarification.
Institutional arrangements for subsea power cables
The Tanzania Electric Supply Company (TANESCO) and Zanzibar Electricity Corporation (ZECO) are responsible for electricity generation, transmission and distribution in mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar respectively.
Spatial management tools for subsea power cables
No spatial management tools have been identified with respect to the protection of subsea power cables.
4.5.5.Tourism and leisure (Key BE Sector #6)
Overview
Tourism is currently one of the leading economic sectors in the URT. The World Economic Forum’s Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index ranks the URT as 1st in Africa and 12th worldwide for the quality of its nature-based tourism resources, and 32nd in Africa and 112th in the world for its cultural resources. However, only a small fraction of Tanzania’s natural and cultural endowments has been put to economic use through tourism development (World Bank, 2021). Tourism has been the URT’s largest foreign exchange earner since 2012, and in 2019 it accounted for over one-quarter of the country’s foreign-exchange earnings. Moreover, as the tourism value chain is linked to numerous other economic sectors, it plays an outsized role in growth, employment, and poverty reduction. 
For the Mainland economy, the tourism sector contributes an estimated 17% of its GDP and directly employs over 850,000 workers, making it the country’s second-largest component of GDP and third-largest source of employment. In Zanzibar tourism is now the most significant local employer, supporting 35,000 direct and about 70,000 indirect jobs, out of the islands’ total population of around 1.4 million people (MoBEF, 2022) and contributing an estimated 28% to the islands’ GDP and 82% of its foreign exchange earnings.
Since the URT’s tourism industry is largely focussed on the well-established land-based tourist regions it is difficult to disaggregate the contribution of the Mainland coastal tourism sector from overall industry figures, where direct expenditures from international visitors account for 5.8% of the economy, (NDF, 2016). This notwithstanding, four interest groups can be identified with respect to coastal and marine tourism: 
(i)wildlife tourism (focused on Saadani National Park, Jozani Forest Reserve and other conservation areas); 
(ii)marine-based tourism (focused on marine reserves and parks, for diving, snorkelling, deep sea fishing, etc.); 
(iii)cultural tourism (historical, heritage and cultural sites); and 
(iv)(iv) beach tourism (beaches, hotels, restaurants, shops, handicrafts, etc.). 
There is considerable overlap within these interest groups, but the bulk of present interest is the coastal beach experience, with numerous beach hotels scattered along the entire coastline. 
Policy & legal framework for tourism - Mainland Tanzania
The energy sector (including petroleum exploration and production) in the URT is governed by a number of policies.
National Tourism Policy of Tanzania (1999)
The goal of the policy is to “maintain the tourist resource base in an adequate manner as it forms part of the public resources, improves the existing infrastructure and to develop it further so as to accrue higher revenues from the sector”.
The policy is structured around four key thematic areas, economic, social, environmental and cultural, under which the policy defines a number of specific objectives.
As one of the constraints, the tourism policy notes that local communities were being minimally involved in decision-making and sharing of tourism proceeds and resources. The policy places a strong emphasis on the private sector with the aim of encouraging increased investment opportunities and promote private entrepreneurship. In addition, the policy includes; (i) strategies of putting regulations that will ensure benefits for local communities, balancing interests of the communities and the private sector and providing mechanisms for micro financing to SMEs strategies aimed at the development of infrastructure to improve accessibility, enhancing quality, and marketing; and a range of  strategies to promote cultural tourism (Musa, 2011).
Tourism Act No. 29 of 2008
This Act  is  the  preeminent legal instrument  governing  tourism in  the  country,  which  includes provisions  for  all  tourism  sub-sectors  tourism  operations. The main purpose of the Act is to “provide for institutional framework, administration, regulation, registration and licensing of tourism facilities and activities; and for related matters.”[ 	Tourism Act, 2008, preamble. ]
As such, the main focus of the Act is on the development and marketing of the tourism sector, and the licensing and regulation of tourism facilities and activities. There is a broad recognition that coastal and marine tourism needs to be provided for in any future MSP framework, and that the policy and legal framework relating to tourism will have to be enhanced to a high relevance level for MSP. 
Policy & legal framework for tourism - Zanzibar
Zanzibar Blue Economy Policy (2022)
Section 4.4. of the Blue Economy Policy addresses tourism. The overarching policy statement in this regard is “The Government shall commit to making Zanzibar a sustainable tourism destination by protecting and promoting its cultural and natural heritage”.
The core focus for the development of the tourism sector is on sustainable tourism by inter alia:
•Ensuring tourism investment in all coastal communities acknowledge and empower local cultures in order to protect and promote them as tourist attractions; and
•Promoting Pemba as a protected area to strengthen the Zanzibar tourism brand while maintaining the island’s environment and cultural values. 
The policy also recognises the opportunities presented by the development of the maritime tourism sector, including cruise ships and yacht tourism.
Zanzibar Tourism Policy (2018)
The overall goal of the policy is to “develop, plan, manage and promote a tourism industry that emphasises sustainability, quality and diversification, and which is culturally responsible, socially desirable, ecologically friendly, environmentally sustainable and economically viable”.[ 	Zanzibar Tourism Policy, section 3.1 – General Tourism Objective.] The policy recognises that its success and sustainability strongly depends upon functional ecological systems. This implies a strong relationship between sustainable coastal resource management and tourism growth.
The policy identifies a number of specific policy objectives including, inter alia “To utilize more effectively the tourism potential to generate more income, human resources, foreign exchange earnings while protecting the environment, Zanzibar culture and traditions.” In this regard, it is envisioned that sustainable economic development should be accompanied by proper environmental management so that Zanzibar’s natural resources and natural heritage are passed on to future generations. 
Under this objective the policy further therefore identifies a number of policy strategies, some of which are directly relevant from the perspective of MSP, namely:
•Create a zonal system to encourage the establishment of Marine Parks for better management and sustainable tourism development.
•Develop wide ranging long term programmes of research towards better and timely strategies for resources utilization and environmental protection.
•Establish the permanent programmes for monitoring the project development trend and tourist attractions that will lead to understand the status of the environment.
•Define the offshore marine boundary in order to avoid poaching from game fishing boats.
Thus, it can be seen that there is broad policy support for integrated marine planning as one mechanism to support the development of the coastal and marine tourism sector.

The Zanzibar Tourism Act No. 9 of 2009
The primary purpose of the Act is to provide for the establishment of the Zanzibar Commission for Tourism, a body corporate with a broad range of functions, powers and duties for the licencing and regulation of tourism activities.
The Act addresses a range of different types of tourism businesses including with relevance to MSP, tourist vessels, marinas and dive centres. The specific conditions associated with marine tourism activities are further elaborated under the Zanzibar Tourism Regulations. These regulations address a broad range of activities including: diving centres; recreational vessels; para-sailing, water skiing and jet skiing; boardsailing and kitesurfing; and marine mammal watching. In addition, the protection of underwater cultural monuments is also addressed under the Regulations.
Institutional arrangements for tourism - Mainland
The Tourism Division under the Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism (MNRT) is the leading governmental institution concerned with the formulation and implementation of tourism development policy strategies and plans, and the stimulation and promotion of private investment activities. It also regulates, promotes and facilitates tourist service provision in the country.  
There are strong synergies between the tourism sector and the conservation sector which is reflected in the MNRT’s mission, which is to "formulate policies and strategies that would lead to sustainable conservation management of natural, cultural resources and environment, promote and diversify tourist attractions and increase sector contribution to national income and foreign exchange earnings." That said, the major focus of the conservation/tourism relationship relates to those national parks on land and there are limited marine related activities at this stage. 
Institutional arrangements for tourism – Zanzibar
The Ministry of Tourism and Heritage in Zanzibar is the leading governmental institution concerned with the  formulation and implementation of tourism development policy strategies and plans on Zanzibar, and the stimulation and promotion of private investment activities.  It also regulates, promotes and facilitates tourist service provision in the archipelago.  The Zanzibar Tourism Commission is a dedicated institution under the Ministry of Tourism and Heritage that is mandated to enforce sustainable tourism regulations in line with conservation of coastal and marine environment.
Spatial management tools for tourism
Two key relationships are recognised with respect to existing spatial management tools in the coastal and marine domain as follows: 
First, there is a strong inter-relationship between coastal tourism and MPAs developed under the various legal instruments outlined above. The provision of zones and facilities within existing MPAs to support the tourism sector is one of the key drivers for designating these areas.
Secondly, one of the key benefits of MSP is to identify and spatially resolve conflicts between different (often incompatible) uses of the marine environment. Consideration of existing and future coastal and marine tourism uses will be a key factor in the development of MSP.  
4.6.2Coastal salt production (Key BE Sector #7)
Overview
The majority of salt production in Africa, including Tanzania, is based on solar salt works situated in the upper intertidal zone, usually inland of mangrove forests. The main use of solar salt is for human consumption, as a vital component in diets, particularly when iodised. Other uses of lower grade, non-iodised salt, include livestock feed, use in food preservation and in industry. 
Production takes place to differing degrees of industrialisation in 12 of the 16 coastal districts in Mainland Tanzania. According to the National Environmental Master Plan for Strategic Interventions, a key issue with respect to salt production is the clearing of mangroves for traditional salt making. While salt pans operated by major salt producers are done behind mangrove areas in the bare salt flats, many salt pan operators tend to violate the conditions given along with the licenses, often encroaching into non-licensed areas normally covered by mangroves to illegally clear the mangrove and expand production areas, a process resulting in degradation of mangrove forest. Major solar salt pans relative to mangrove areas are in Bagamoyo, Kilwa, Lindi, Mkinga, Mkuranga and Mtwara. Presently there is about 7,250 ha of salt pans distributed almost all over the coastline (Office of the Vice President, 2022). 
The sea salt production industry through solar salt pans represents large business with investments of billions of TZS and supply over 90% of domestic and industrial consumption (WWF, 2022).
Policy & legal framework for coastal salt production – Mainland Tanzania
Mineral Policy of Tanzania (2009).
The Mineral Policy of Tanzania was promulgated in 2009 by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, which is charged with the responsibility of formulating a mineral policy, overseeing its administration and coordinating the development of the mineral sector of Tanzania. The Policy is driven by its vision, which is to have an effective mineral sector contributing significantly to the acceleration of socioeconomic development through the sustainable development and utilisation of mineral resources in Tanzania by 2025. 
The objectives of the Policy include, but are not limited to, improvement of the economic environment for the purposes of attracting and sustaining local and international private investment in the mineral sector. According to the Mineral Policy, the government of Tanzania is to remain as regulator and facilitator of the sector while promoting private sector involvement. 
The overarching objective of the Policy is to increase the mineral sector’s contribution to the GDP and alleviate poverty by integrating the mining industry with the rest of the economy. Although the link with salt mining is not obvious, ‘salt’ is defined as an industrial mineral in the context of the policy and related legal framework.
As such, the policy and legal regime dealing with minerals and mining appears to be broadly applicable.
National Environmental Policy (2021)
As noted above, the NEP addresses eight major environmental threats, including inter alia: Land degradation; loss of wildlife habitats and biodiversity; deterioration of aquatic systems; deforestation; and, environmental pollution. In the context of deterioration of aquatic systems, the Policy includes a number of policy statements that are relevant to coastal salt extraction.
National Integrated Coastal Environment Management Strategy (2003)
This Strategy recognises the importance of salt production to the livelihoods of coastal communities. Strategy 3 explicitly recognises the need for actions to increase productivity of current economic activities (including salt production) and to promote alternative environmentally sustainable livelihoods. However, it also recognises the critical need for environmental planning and management of key economic opportunities within the coastal area.
The Mining Act No. 14 of 2010
This Act establishes the law relating to prospecting for minerals, mining, processing and dealing in minerals, to granting, renewal and termination of mineral rights, payment of royalties, fees and other charges and any other relevant matters. The Act applies to Mainland Tanzania.
According to the definitions, salt is considered to be an ‘industrial mineral’ and therefore subject to the licencing regime of this Act. In this regard, the Act provides a licencing regime (including prospecting licences and mining licences) for the development of any coastal salt resources. These licences are issued by the Minister responsible for mineral and mining. The granting of such licenses is subject to the granting of relevant approvals under the Environment Management Act.
Environment Management Act No. 2 of 2004
Under this Act, any person undertaking a mining activity must undertake an environmental impact assessment (EIA). The successful completion and approval of an EIA will result in the issuance of an EIA Certificate and as such, this is a requirement for salt production.
Policy & legal framework for coastal salt production – Zanzibar
There are general environmental management guidelines on salt pans with respect to salt extraction in Zanzibar. These guidelines are often prescribed from two key institutions – the Ministry responsible for Environment (Environmental Briefs and Mangrove Biodiversity Conservation) and the Ministry responsible for Forest Conservation (Protection of Mangroves).  In the past the Department of Fisheries was involved in the Environmental Assessment processes. However, with the establishment of the Ministry of Blue Economy and Fisheries in 2020, the Department of Blue Economy Development and Coordination has been assigned to coordinate environmental and fisheries aspects of the ZEMA-led ESIA process along with the Department of Marine Conservation, Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture, and the Zanzibar Fisheries and Marine Resources Research Institute (ZAFIRI). 
The Zanzibar Environmental Management Act No. 3 of 2015
As noted in section 4.5.1 above, this Act contains broad provisions relating to different aspects of marine environmental management, including the extraction of non-renewable natural resources. While ‘salt’ is not explicitly included under the definition of non-renewable natural resources, the definition is broad enough to be interpreted to apply to salt.
In this regard, the Act requires that no person may excavate a non-renewable natural resource without a permit issued by the Joint Management Committee for Non-renewable Natural Resources Management established pursuant to this Act.   
Sustainable Utilization of Non-Renewable Natural Resources Regulations, 2011
These regulations provide additional legal controls for activities in the coastal zone. According to the regulations, no person may “excavate, mine, extract, dredge, collect, harvest, transform, transport, lease and or sell any non-renewable natural resource” without inter alia authorisation from the ZEMA. In addition, pursuant to regulation 6, the Regulations define a number of specific buffer zones from within which it is prohibited to “excavate, mine, extract, and or dredge non-renewable natural resource”, including:
Within, and one km buffer zone from, any recognized forest protected area, and mangrove habitat; and
Within, and one km buffer zone from, the beach. 
Forest Resources Management and Conservation Act No. 10 of 1996 
The purpose of this Act is to promote the protection, conservation and development of forest resources for the social, economic and environmental benefit of present and future generations of the people of Zanzibar. 
Given the relationship between salt extraction and mangrove resources, this Act is applicable to salt mining. In particular, the Act makes it an offence to conduct salt-making operations, unless authorised to do so by a licence issued by the Department of Forestry and Non-Renewable Natural Resources, within any Forest Reserve, which includes most, if not all coastal mangrove resources in Zanzibar.
Institutional arrangements for coastal salt production
The main body regulating mining activities in Mainland Tanzania is the Mining Commission, which is established as a body corporate and is vested with functions that include supervising and regulating the sector, issuing, cancelling and renewing mineral rights, and resolving disputes arising out of mining operations or activities. EIA’s are approved by the National Environment Management Council, while the Forestry and Beekeeping Division has responsibility for the conservation and management of mangroves, including any activities undertaken therein.
In Zanzibar, the Zanzibar Environmental Management Authority is responsible for ESIA process on salt pans while the Ministry of Blue Economy and Fisheries and the Department of Forestry and Natural Resources are primarily involved in conservation of the mangrove ecosystem for managing the impacts of salt production. On the other hand, the institution responsible for managing non-renewable natural resources is the Ministry of Energy and Minerals of Zanzibar through the Department of Minerals.
Spatial management tools for coastal salt production
No specific spatial management tools are available for the control of coastal salt production. However, the application of Forest Reserves appears to be a relevant management tool in this respect.
4.7Monitoring, Control and Surveillance of the URT’s Marine Space
4.7.1Overview
Creating the conditions needed for effective management of ocean space and future economic growth, including the implementation of MSP, depends on an effective and efficient maritime monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) system. 
The MCS Principles
The monitoring component of MCS should receive, integrate and verify information from licensing units, sea-going units (sightings and inspections), observers, VMS and satellite imagery, radar, port inspection, regular dockside monitoring of landings, logbooks, production logbooks, and air sightings for vessel identification, activity and location. The system can also include data on fishing patterns, fishers and community profiles with respect to socioeconomic factors, dependency and earnings from fishing and any other fisheries information. 
The control component of MCS will require appropriate and enforceable legislation to implement the approved, participatory fisheries management plans. In order for the control component of the MCS system to function effectively, the fisheries administration should have access to a team of suitably qualified and experienced lawyers to draft appropriate legislation in support of management plans, to provide ongoing advice on legal issues that may arise with regard to the implementation of management measures, and to prosecute offences under fisheries legislation. 
The surveillance component of MCS will require authorized personnel to collect data for the monitoring aspect of MCS during their surveillance duties, and to communicate with and educate stakeholders involved in participatory conservation activities. Surveillance involved personnel must have the appropriate equipment and facilities, operating funds and training to be skilful to encourage voluntary compliance and to enforce laws if necessary. 
MCS should be applied to all maritime activities, but it is mainly focussed on:
For fishery management MCS serves as an implementation mechanism that fisheries managers use to implement fisheries policies and management plans.
For shipping, Port State Control measures are an important way of enforcing international standards such as the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL 73/78) and the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) that variously address issues related to shipping and maritime pollution.
Monitoring and surveillance activities are an essential component to identify and control Illegal activities such as drug trafficking, piracy, terrorism and human trafficking. Such monitoring can be undertaken using arial and sea going assets as well as remote sensing technology such as automated identification systems (AIS), vessel monitoring systems (VMS) and other satellite tracking systems.
4.7.2Current MCS Arrangements
The URT already has in place a range of arrangements aimed at MCS of its marine space, and is a party to a number of regional strategies aimed at strengthening MCS in the region. These include, but are not necessarily limited to: (i) the 2008 Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) regional maritime security strategy; (ii) the 2011 Southern African Development Community (SADC) maritime strategy; and (iii) the 2014 Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) strategy. 
These initiatives are further operationalized through regional maritime codes of conduct such as the Djibouti Code of Conduct (signed in 2009) and Yaoundé Code of Conduct (signed in 2013).
In this regard, the URT participates in a number of regional initiatives aimed at strengthening MCS activities. These include:
FISH-I Africa: Established by Stop Illegal Fishing in 2012, FISH-I Africa has bought a new approach to stopping illegal fishing in the region. It enables the sharing of real-time information and intelligence and coordinates actions against vessels suspected of operating illegally. Increased knowledge about the illegal operators, their methods and techniques means that enforcement capacity can be targeted more effectively. 
IOC Regional Fisheries Monitoring Plan: Under the IOC’s Regional Fisheries Monitoring Plan (PSRP) participating nations (including Comoros, France on behalf of Réunion island, Kenya, Madagascar, Mauritius, Mozambique, Seychelles and the URT) routinely share and exchange information to help conduct illegal fishing investigations.
EUCAP Nestor Project: Under the EU-supported EUCAP Nestor project, the URT is benefitting from support to develop a self-sustainable capacity for continued enhancement of the maritime security, including counter-piracy and maritime governance. Recently this has included capacity building of staff from Tanzania Maritime Police Unit (TMPU) and the Tanzania Naval Command, to undertake criminal investigations.
Indian Ocean Memorandum on Port State Control: An inter-governmental organization on Port State Control (PSC) in the Indian Ocean Region, recognized by the IMO. The MoU provides a regional network of port State control inspectors and allows the sharing of vessel inspection information among member States of the MoU in order to verify and ensure that the ships entering their ports are in optimal conditions. The MoU includes the Indian Ocean Computerized Information System (IOCIS) for the purpose of exchanging information on port State inspections.
Djibouti Code of Conduct: The Code of Conduct Concerning the Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery Against Ships and Illicit Maritime Activity in the Western Indian Ocean and the Gulf of Aden Area (Djibouti Code of Conduct) was adopted in 2009 to facilitate cooperation among signatories (including the URT) in the repression of piracy and armed robbery against ships. The Code provides for sharing of piracy-related information, through its information sharing network established in 2011. The network is centred on the three Information Sharing Centres: the Regional Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre (RMRCC) in Mombasa, Kenya, Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre (MRCC) in Dar es Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania and the Regional Maritime Information Sharing Centre (ReMISC) in Sana'a, Yemen. It is used to exchange information on piracy incidents across the region and other relevant information to help shipping and signatory States to take action to mitigate piracy threats.
4.7.3Current Capabilities
MCS activities cover the broad range of maritime sectors. However, the major focus in the URT is on EEZ and coastal fisheries, marine conservation, shipping, and the suppression of unlawful acts (such as piracy and trafficking). For Zanzibar, KMKM (Kikosi Maalum cha Kuzuia Magendo, translated as ‘Special Unit for Prevention of Smuggling’) is mandated to focus on marine trafficking and smuggling. It is also the de facto enforcement agency in Zanzibar for other MCS and security-related issues in nearshore and territorial waters around Zanzibar, including for example blast-fishing and other IUU fishing that’s beyond the capacity of Department of Fisheries. 
EEZ Fisheries
For the specific case of EEZ fisheries The Deep Sea Fisheries Management and Development Act No. 5 of 2020 provides the enabling legislation for all fisheries MCS activities in the URT’s EEZ. Pursuant to section 21(1) of the Act, the Authority shall develop, implement, monitor and enforce conservation and management measures necessary to ensure the long-term sustainable use of fishery resources. The Act does not prescribe what these measures might be. Instead, these are set out in detail in The Deep Sea Fisheries Management and Development Regulations, 2021.
The Act also provides for Port State Measures application and implementation to apply to foreign fishing vessels and fishing vessels entitled to fly the flag of Tanzania that seek entry to a port or are in a port of Tanzania, with certain exceptions. The Port State Measures also apply to all fishing and fishing related activities and persons, vessels, vehicles , and so on, engaged in activities within the purview of the Act. The Act contains incidental provisions with respect to funding, offences, the courts vested with jurisdiction to handle matters arising from the Act, evidentiary procedures of the Court, and so on.
Detailed provision relating to MCS in the EEZ are provided in the Deep Sea Fisheries Management and Development Regulations, 2021, promulgated under section 101 of the parent Act.
Part IV of the regulations contained comprehensive provisions for MCS including inter alia:
Powers of entry, search, seizure and arrest
Deployment of fishery observers
Duties of fishery inspectors
Pre-licensing and off-loading inspection procedures and requirements
Use of VMS, IAS and other mobile transceiver units
Port State measures and restriction on port entry
The DSFA has established a compliance section which has responsibility for: (i) monitoring and control; and (ii) enforcement.  The Fisheries Monitoring Centre (FMC) is responsible for MCS activities such as observer program, inspection program, aerial surveillance, joint sea patrols (boarding inspection), dockside inspection (pre license Inspection and landing inspection), Vessel Monitoring System Themis Web base System (VMS) and Automatic Identification System (AIS). The FMC carries out inspectorate duties with regards to port State inspection of fishing vessels, land inspections, sea and air surveillance pertaining to national and regional requirements.  These are undertaken in conjunction with the Tanzania People’s Defence Force/Navy and the Tanzania Marine Police. 
Air patrols are also undertaken in collaboration with Tanzanian Navy, Marine Police Smuggling Unit, and Fisheries Development Divisions of (Tanzania Mainland and Zanzibar) according to Regulation (35) regarding Authorized officer to participate in surveillance activities to combat IUU fishing in the EEZ of Tanzania. 

Coastal Fisheries
Both Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar have provisions under their respective fisheries Acts to establish MCS activities for coastal fisheries. 
For Mainland Tanzania The Fisheries Act and subsidiary regulations provide the overarching legal basis for fishery-related MCS activities in Mainland Tanzania. The Act provides for the creation of a Surveillance Unit (under Part VIII of the Act) with responsibility for the protection of fish and its environment, fishery products and aquatic flora against unlawful dealers and generally the enforcement of the provisions of this Act.
Under this Part, the Director may designate Authorised Officers, with broad functions, powers and duties for MCS activities. These officers may include Director or any fisheries officer or a member of beach management unit or other person authorized in writing by the Director. 
The Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries has established five Fisheries Resource Protection Units along the coast in Tanga, Dar es Salaam, Mafia, Kilwa and Mtwara respectively. These units have vessels and dedicated MCS teams at each of these locations and are responsible for undertaking compliance inspections of vessels and landing sites. 
The Fisheries Division also uses co-management philosophy in managing its resources, which provides scope for local communities to participate in the enforcement of fisheries and other related laws. Local community groups participating in the enforcement of fisheries resources include BMUs, CFMAs and Village Liaison Committees (VLCs).
For Zanzibar, Zanzibar Fisheries Act provides the overarching framework for MCS activities. Pursuant to the Act, the Fisheries Department has established a MCS unit that works alongside the Department of Marine Conservation. Staff of the MCS Unit have access to vessels and undertake regular monitoring in Zanzibar’s Marine Conservation Areas. 
The Act provides for the appointment of Authorized Officers with broad powers of inspection, seizure and arrest. These officers may include the Director or any fisheries officer or a member of fishermen committee or any other person authorized in writing by the Director to exercise any power or to discharge any duty under this Act
Port State Control
Both Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar have enacted provisions in their respective legal frameworks to provide for the undertaking of Port State Control functions in their ports. 
For Mainland Tanzania, TASAC has primary responsibility for undertaking PSC activities pursuant to the  Merchant Shipping Act (2003) and the Tanzania Shipping Agencies Act (2017).  Pursuant to these two instruments, with regards to the regulation of the maritime environment and maritime safety and security, TASAC shall inter alia:
administer the Merchant Shipping Act 2003;
exercise port State control of all foreign ships and flag State control of ships registered in Mainland Tanzania;
regulate and approve marine services, safety equipment and marine services providers;
coordinate maritime search and rescue operations;
regulate and coordinate the protection and preservation of the marine environment;
TASAC operates a vessel monitoring system from the port of Dar es Salaam allowing it to track, using AIS, all vessels entering the URT’s territorial waters.
For Zanzibar, The ZMA is responsible for regulating all aspects of shipping within its waters, pursuant to the Zanzibar maritime Authority Act (2009) and the Maritime Transport Act (2006).
Suppression of Unlawful Acts
Issues relating to the suppression of unlawful acts (such as marine piracy, trafficking of illicit goods and people and the protection of national borders) are Union matters that are managed by the Government of the URT. The approach to addressing these issues is a multi-agency one that includes:
The TPDF – Primarily the Tanzania Naval Command
The Tanzania Police Force
The Tanzania Revenue Authority
Deep Sea Fishing Authority
Ministry of Fisheries
The Ministry of Works and Transport
To support coordination of these efforts the Government has established a number of inter-agency Task Teams. For example, in an effort to find a lasting and effective solution to the escalating cases of environmental and wildlife crime the Ministry of Home Affairs launched a Multi-Agency Task Team (MATT). Aimed at coordinating efforts and resources, the Task Team will be led by the Tanzania Police Force and encompasses Tanzania Forest Services, the Wildlife Division, Fisheries Division, Tanzania Intelligence and Security Services as well as seeking engagement with the criminal justice system.
The initiative has been supported by the Indian Ocean Commission’s (IOC) SmartFish Project implemented jointly with the FAO and funded by the European Union. 
At the domestic level, it is understood that, the URT has established a number of shore-based tracking stations, operated by the Tanzania People’s Defence Force, that provide capabilities for situational awareness functionality through multiple sensor fusion, target detection and classification capabilities. This system provides the URT with an improved regional surveillance capability to monitor its maritime space. 
To support its MCS activities, the Tanzania Naval Command has recently received new patrol vessels with support from the US Africa Command. These vessels are already deployed in the Mozambique Channel to help the Southern African Development Community and international partners address an array of sea crimes, including illegal fishing, drug smuggling, oil theft and human and weapons trafficking.